---
id: ITE-2023-076
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 76
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.934102
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: C
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Acute Asthma Exacerbations: Management Strategies.'
  path: 2024/2024-01-acute-asthma-exacerbations-management-strategies.md
  similarity: 0.643
  link: '[[2024/2024-01-acute-asthma-exacerbations-management-strategies|Acute Asthma
    Exacerbations: Management Strategies.]]'
- title: 'Respiratory Syncytial Virus Bronchiolitis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2023/2023-07-respiratory-syncytial-virus-bronchiolitis-rapid-evidence-rev.md
  similarity: 0.55
  link: '[[2023/2023-07-respiratory-syncytial-virus-bronchiolitis-rapid-evidence-rev|Respiratory
    Syncytial Virus Bronchiolitis: Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: Five Days of Antibiotic Treatment Is an Option for Children 3 Months to 5
    Years of Age With Uncomplicated but Febrile UTI.
  path: 2024/2024-07-five-days-of-antibiotic-treatment-is-an-option-for-children.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-five-days-of-antibiotic-treatment-is-an-option-for-children|Five
    Days of Antibiotic Treatment Is an Option for Children 3 Months to 5 Years of
    Age With Uncomplicated but Febrile UTI.]]'
- title: Update on Routine Immunizations for Children and Adolescents.
  path: 2025/2025-05-update-on-routine-immunizations-for-children-and-adolescents.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2025/2025-05-update-on-routine-immunizations-for-children-and-adolescents|Update
    on Routine Immunizations for Children and Adolescents.]]'
- title: 'Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Diagnosis and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-06-chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-diagnosis-and-manageme.md
  similarity: 0.474
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-diagnosis-and-manageme|Chronic
    Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Diagnosis and Management.]]'
topics:
- Emergency Medicine
- Infectious Disease
- Nephrology
- Pediatrics
- Pharmacology
- Pulmonology
- Shortness Of Breath
---

# Question ITE-2023-076

An 8-year-old female is brought to the emergency department by her parents because of an asthma exacerbation that started earlier today in the context of a new upper respiratory infection. This morning she doubled her usual fluticasone (Flovent) inhaler and took 44 g, four puffs. She has also been taking albuterol (Proventil, Ventolin), 90 g, two puffs every hour for the past 3 hours, with minimal relief of shortness of breath and wheezing. She has a temperature of 36.9°C (98.4°F), a respiratory rate of 28/min, a pulse rate of 128 beats/min, and an oxygen saturation of 96% on room air. On examination you note diffuse expiratory wheezing throughout both lungs. She received nebulized ipratropium/albuterol and oral prednisolone just prior to your assessment and reports feeling slightly better. When administered intravenously, which one of the following has the best evidence of preventing the need for hospital admission for this patient’s acute asthma exacerbation?

## Options

**A.** Diphenhydramine

**B.** Epinephrine

**C.** Magnesium

**D.** Terbutaline

**E.** Theophylline

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

This child’s persistent asthma symptoms despite frequent use of an inhaled short-acting -agonist (SABA) indicate an acute asthma exacerbation. Her vital signs show significant tachypnea and tachycardia consistent with this clinical picture and inhaled ipratropium is a good next step. Given this patient’s persistent symptoms and abnormal vital signs, intravenous magnesium is an appropriate next-line intervention. Its bronchodilator effects are thought to be related to improvements in airway excitability and smooth muscle relaxation. Its use has been associated with reduced hospitalization in children and adults without a subsequent increase in return for emergency care. It has a low incidence of side effects and toxicity. Diphenhydramine would be indicated if there were concern for an allergic process, but that is not the case in this patient. Parenteral epinephrine is indicated in asthma only if it is associated with anaphylaxis. Terbutaline is a SABA that can be administered parenterally and does not improve symptoms in patients who are already receiving an inhaled SABA. Theophylline is no longer recommended due to concerns about side effects and toxicity.

## References

Griffiths B, Kew KM. Intravenous magnesium sulfate for treating children with acute asthma in the emergency department. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2016;4(4):CD011050. 2) Erumbala G, Anzar S, Tonbari A, Salem R, Powell C. Stating the obvious: intravenous magnesium sulphate should be the first parenteral bronchodilator in paediatric asthma exacerbations unresponsive to first-line therapy. Breathe (Sheff) . 2021;17(4):210113. 3) Kwofie K, Wolfson AB. Intravenous magnesium sulfate for acute asthma exacerbation in children and adults. Am Fam Physician . 2021;103(4):245-246. 4) Global Initiative for Asthma. Global Strategy for Asthma Management and Prevention . Updated 2022.
