---
id: ITE-2023-073
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 73
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.714698
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2023"]
answer: C
difficulty: Intermediate
topics: ["Pulmonology", "Endocrinology", "Urology", "Hematology/Oncology", "Preventive Medicine"]
---

# Question ITE-2023-073

Overdiagnosis is defined as the diagnosis of a condition that, if unrecognized, would not cause symptoms or harm during the patient’s lifetime. Which one of the following interventions has the best likelihood of reducing overdiagnosis?

## Options

**A.** Broadening the criteria for diagnosis of a condition

**B.** Creating financial incentives for more testing

**C.** Focusing screening efforts on populations at highest risk for a disease

**D.** Redefining risk factors as pre-diseases

**E.** Using more sensitive screening tests

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

Overdiagnosis is a consequence of a health system that seeks to diagnose disease before it is clinically evident in the hope of intervening to improve morbidity and mortality. The benefits of a system in which disease is detected early and health is improved must be balanced against the drawbacks in which patients are more often labeled as “sick” and engage in treatments that may cause harm without always resulting in benefit. Focusing screening efforts on populations most at risk of a disease will result in more true positive test results and the identification of patients more likely to benefit from intervention. Examples of lack of benefit include the identification of an indolent cancer that would never have spread or caused harm (e.g., low-grade prostate cancer detected via prostate-specific antigen screening) and improvements in technology leading to increased sensitivity for the detection of disease for which there is a lack of clarity in what to treat or not treat (e.g., improvements in CT scanning technology resulting in an increased sensitivity for diagnosing small pulmonary emboli, including those that are clinically unimportant). Other examples of overdiagnosis include changes in the definition of chronic kidney disease that lead to an increase in the number of patients labeled with this diagnosis, few of whom will progress to end-stage disease, and defining prediabetes as a disease rather than as a risk factor for a disease when only about one-third of patients with prediabetes will progress to diabetes over 10 years.

## References

- Kale MS, Korenstein D. Overdiagnosis in primary care: framing the problem and finding solutions. BMJ. 2018;362:k2820.
