---
id: ITE-2024-090
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 90
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.368144
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
- title: 'PubMed Entry'
  path: 2022/2022-11-osteoporosis-prevention-screening-and-diagnosis-acog-recomme.md
  similarity: 0.2
  link: '[[2022-11-osteoporosis-prevention-screening-and-diagnosis-acog-recomme|PubMed Entry]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-090

## Question
A 15 -year-old male is brought to your office for a sports preparticipation evaluation. You obtain a 
medical history and perform a physical examination, including elements from the American Heart 
Association's (AHA) 14 -point screening evaluation.  
 
According to the AHA 14 -point screening evaluation, which one of th e following findings would 
warrant an EKG prior to clearing this patient for participation in sports?

## Answer Choices
**A)** 14 -point screening evaluation. According to the AHA 14 -point screening evaluation, which one of th e following findings would warrant an EKG prior to clearing this patient for participation in sport
**B)** Complete recovery from mild COVID -19 diagnosed 14 days ago
**C)** A family history of coronary artery bypass surgery in a 65 -year-old grandfather
**D)** A family history of mitral stenosis due to rheumatic heart disease in a 45 -year-old aunt
**E)** A coach’s request for an EKG

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommend obtaining an EKG prior to clearance for sports participation only in a patient who has a positive result, such as elevated systemic blood pressure, on the AHA 14 -point screen ing evaluation. An athlete with COVID -19 and mild symptoms should rest and avoid exercise for 14 days after diagnosis and may then return to sports if asymptomatic. A family history of cardiac problems or sudden death prior to age 50 is a qualifying elemen t; however, a history of rheumatic heart disease in a relative would not be relevant. A coach’s preference is not a qualifying element.

## References
s ACC/AHA release recommendations for congenital and genetic heart disease screenings in youth. American College of Cardiology. September 15, 2014. Schefft M, Wolf ER, Quinonez R, Haskell H, James J. Appropriate use of electrocardiography in preparticipation physical evaluations. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(3):302 -306.

## Related AAFP Articles
- [[2022-11-osteoporosis-prevention-screening-and-diagnosis-acog-recomme|PubMed Entry]] (Relevance: 20%)

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*