---
id: ITE-2022-002
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 2
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.665687
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2022"]
answer: E
difficulty: Intermediate
topics: ["Pulmonology", "Dermatology", "Pediatrics", "Urology", "Infectious Disease"]
---

# Question ITE-2022-002

A pelvic examination is notable for a normal urethral body and thick, pink vulvar tissue. The vaginal vault is without prolapse. You ask her to cough with a full bladder and note leakage of urine. A urinalysis is normal. You counsel her on appropriate fluid intake, timed voiding, the reduction of caffeinated and carbonated beverages, regular moderate physical activity, and weight loss. In addition to these behavioral modifications, which one of the following is the most appropriate intervention at this time?

## Options

**A.** An oral antimuscarinic agent

**B.** Intravaginal estrogen

**C.** OnabotulinumtoxinA (Botox)

**D.** Pelvic floor muscle training

**E.** Urethropexy

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

Erythema nodosum, a panniculitis that typically affects the subcutaneous fat on the anterior surface of the lower legs, is associated with coccidioidomycosis (valley fever) and can suggest the diagnosis. It is a manifestation of the patient’s immune response and often indicates a good prognosis. In addition to coccidioidomycosis, it can also be associated with streptococcal infections as well as tuberculosis. Erythema ab igne is a cutaneous rash caused by prolonged heat exposure (such as a heating pad) presenting as an otherwise asymptomatic, red, reticulated pattern on the skin. Erythema infectiosum is associated with parvovirus B19 infection and is usually seen in young children. It manifests as an erythematous rash of the face (slapped cheek appearance), arms, and legs. Erythema migrans is an expanding, erythematous, annular rash with or without central clearing and is often associated with tick exposure (Lyme disease). Erythema multiforme consists of raised, annular, target-like lesions with central erythema and is usually associated with herpes simplex virus type 1.

## References

- Schwartz RA, Nervi SJ: Erythema nodosum: A sign of systemic disease. Am Fam Physician 2007;75(5):695-700. 2) Trayes KP, Savage K, Studdiford JS: Annular lesions: Diagnosis and treatment. Am Fam Physician 2018;98(5):283-291. 3) Herrick KR, Trondle ME, Febles TT: Coccidioidomycosis (valley fever) in primary care. Am Fam Physician 2020;101(4):221-228. 1
