---
id: ITE-2024-170
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 170
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.174656
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Gastroenterology
related_articles:
topics:
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-170

## Question
A 33 -year-old female sees you for follow -up of recently diagnosed diarrhea -predominant irritable 
bowel syndrome (IBS -D). She has had some improvement in the consistency of her stools and in the 
frequency and urgency of her bowel movements with the addition of a psyllium supplement, but she 
continues to have periodic significant cramping and bloating. She prefers over -the-counter products 
and supplements to prescription medication when possible.  
 
Which one of the following over -the-counter products has the best evidence of benefit for improving 
global symptoms of IBS -D?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto -Bismol)
**B)** Omega -3 fatty acids
**C)** Peppermint oil
**D)** . She has had some improvement in the consistency of her stools and in the frequency and urgency of her bowel movements with the addition of a psyllium supplement, but she continues to have periodic s
**E)** Wheat bran

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
Peppermint oil has evidence of benefit in alleviating symptoms related to irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) and is recommended by the American College of Gastroenterologists, the American Gastroenterological Association, and the British Society of Gastroenterology in their clinical practice guidelines. Peppermint oil is classified as an antispasmodic, and it is thought to have a relaxant effect on smooth muscle due to the blockade of calcium channels. Enteric -coated formulations are recommended to a void esopha geal reflux that may occur due to relaxation of the lower esophageal sphincter. Bismuth subsalicylate, omega -3 fatty acids, Hypericum perforatum (St John’s wort), and wheat bran are not evidence -based recommendations for the management of IBS in any guidelines. Furthermore, wheat bran is a source of insoluble fiber, and soluble fiber is recommended for IBS.

## References
s Lacy BE, Pimentel M, Brenner DM, et al. ACG clinical guideline: management of irritable bowel syndrome. Am J Gastroenterol . 2021;116(1):17 -44. Lembo A, Sultan S, Chang L, Heidelbaugh JJ, Smalley W, Verne GN. AGA clinical practice guideline on the pharmacological management of irritable bowel syndrome with diarrhea. Gastroenterology . 2022;163(1):137 -151. Vasant DH, Paine PA, Black CJ, et al. British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines on the management of irritable bowel syndrome. Gut. 2021;70(7):1214 -1240.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*