---
id: ITE-2024-108
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 108
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.536785
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Endocrinology
related_articles: null
topics:
- Endocrinology
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: cochrane corticosteroids asthma
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-cochrane-corticosteroids-asthma.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-cochrane-corticosteroids-asthma|cochrane corticosteroids
    asthma]]'
- title: food allergies
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-food-allergies.md
  similarity: 0.311
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-food-allergies|food allergies]]'
- title: editorial xylazine overdose crisis
  path: 2023/09/2023-09-editorial-xylazine-overdose-crisis.md
  similarity: 0.309
  link: '[[2023/09/2023-09-editorial-xylazine-overdose-crisis|editorial xylazine overdose
    crisis]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: fatigue adults
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults|fatigue adults]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:42.688977'
---

# Question ITE-2024-108

## Question
A 76 -year-old female presents to the emergency department after a fall when stepping out of the 
shower. Her past medical history is notable for hypothyroidism, severe asthma, and a low BMI. Her 
vital signs are normal, but she is unable to bear weight on th e left lower extremity. The left lower 
extremity is shortened and externally rotated with intact neurovascular status. The left anterior groin 
is also tender to palpation.  
 Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Radiography of the hip and pelvis
**B)** Ultrasonography of the left leg to evaluate for a blood clot
**C)** CT of the hip and pelvis
**D)** MRI of the left hip
**E)** Evaluation by a physical therapist

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
This patient has sustained a traumatic left hip fracture after falling while getting out of the shower. Hip fractures can present with anterior groin pain and the affected extremity is often visually deformed with external rotation, shortening, and abducti on. Assuming the patient is stable and has an intact neurovascular status, the most appropriate next step would be to order radiography of the hip and pelvis. CT or MRI would be indicated if x -rays were negative but a high suspicion for fracture persists. Hip fractures do increase the risk for blood clot, and ultrasonography could be performed if clotting were a concern, but this would not be the first diagnostic step for this patient. A physical therapist should be consulted after making a diagnosis and develo ping a treatment plan.

## References
Schroeder JD, Turner SP, Buck E. Hip fractures: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(6):675 -683.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*