---
id: ITE-2023-128
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 128
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.938985
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Long COVID: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-11-long-covid-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.458
  link: '[[2022/2022-11-long-covid-rapid-evidence-review|Long COVID: Rapid Evidence
    Review.]]'
- title: 'Diagnosis and Management of Sodium Disorders: Hyponatremia and Hypernatremia.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-diagnosis-and-management-of-sodium-disorders-hyponatremia-an.md
  similarity: 0.409
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-diagnosis-and-management-of-sodium-disorders-hyponatremia-an|Diagnosis
    and Management of Sodium Disorders: Hyponatremia and Hypernatremia.]]'
- title: Acute Medication Poisoning.
  path: 2024/2024-02-acute-medication-poisoning.md
  similarity: 0.385
  link: '[[2024/2024-02-acute-medication-poisoning|Acute Medication Poisoning.]]'
- title: 'Diabetic Ketoacidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.'
  path: 2024/2024-11-diabetic-ketoacidosis-evaluation-and-treatment.md
  similarity: 0.346
  link: '[[2024/2024-11-diabetic-ketoacidosis-evaluation-and-treatment|Diabetic Ketoacidosis:
    Evaluation and Treatment.]]'
- title: Over-the-Counter Medications in Pregnancy.
  path: 2023/2023-10-over-the-counter-medications-in-pregnancy.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2023/2023-10-over-the-counter-medications-in-pregnancy|Over-the-Counter
    Medications in Pregnancy.]]'
topics:
- Abdominal Pain
- Cardiology
- Chest Pain
- Dermatology
- Emergency Medicine
- Gastroenterology
- Orthopedics
- Preventive Medicine
---

# Question ITE-2023-128

A 45-year-old female who lives in southern Florida presents to the urgent care clinic after a suspected spider bite. She was cleaning up some debris on her patio when she felt a pinprick on her right lower extremity and saw a spider crawl off her leg. The spider was shiny, with a dark-colored body and a red hourglass shape on its abdomen. She developed pain around the bite area. She applied ice to the wound, but the pain has persisted and comes in waves. She currently rates her pain as 4 points on a 10-point scale. The patient is up to date on her tetanus vaccination and is unaware of any allergies. Her vital signs are stable. She is not experiencing any chest pain, chest tightness, tachycardia, abdominal pain, or muscle spasms. A physical examination reveals a small target lesion on her right lateral malleolus, with some erythema and swelling at the site. The remainder of the physical examination is unremarkable. The most appropriate initial step in management would be

## Options

**A.** oral analgesia with NSAIDs

**B.** calcium and magnesium

**C.** parenteral opioids

**D.** antivenom

**E.** hospital admission

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

While they are rarely life-threatening, there are two medically relevant spiders in the United States: the recluse spider and the widow spider. The patient in this case likely has a widow bite. These are medium-sized spiders, reaching up to 4 cm (2 in). They have shiny, dark-colored bodies with a characteristic red hourglass marking. Widow spiders are rarely found inside the home, but rather in shady, enclosed spaces outdoors such as in a shed, under gardening equipment, and amid yard debris. Latrodectism, a systemic envenomation caused by excessive acetylcholine release that results in muscle spasm and diaphoresis of the affected extremity, is rare. Envenomation severity can be graded to help determine treatment. Mild presentations can be treated with oral nonopioid pain medications such as NSAIDs. Calcium and magnesium have not demonstrated any benefit in spider bites. Parenteral opioids are sometimes indicated for poorly controlled pain, and benzodiazepines can be used for painful muscle spasms. This patient is not experiencing these effects. The use of antivenom is controversial, especially because widow spider bites are rarely life-threatening. Antivenom may decrease pain duration, but there is a risk of allergic reaction in up to 5% of patients. Hospital admission is reserved for grade 3 clinical presentations with generalized muscular pain in the chest, abdomen, and back; diaphoresis of the bite site; headache; nausea; vomiting; and abnormal vital signs.

## References

Herness J, Snyder MJ, Newman RS. Arthropod bites and stings. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(2):137-147. 50
