---
id: ITE-2023-052
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 52
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.932067
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Celiac Disease: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2022/2022-07-celiac-disease-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.389
  link: '[[2022/2022-07-celiac-disease-common-questions-and-answers|Celiac Disease:
    Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Chronic Constipation in Adults.
  path: 2022/2022-09-chronic-constipation-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.348
  link: '[[2022/2022-09-chronic-constipation-in-adults|Chronic Constipation in Adults.]]'
- title: 'Diverticular Disease: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.348
  link: '[[2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review|Diverticular Disease:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Peptic Ulcer Disease and H. pylori Infection: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-02-peptic-ulcer-disease-and-h-pylori-infection-common-questions.md
  similarity: 0.348
  link: '[[2023/2023-02-peptic-ulcer-disease-and-h-pylori-infection-common-questions|Peptic
    Ulcer Disease and H. pylori Infection: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Screening Patients With Rosacea for Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth.
  path: 2025/2025-05-screening-patients-with-rosacea-for-small-intestinal-bacteri.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2025/2025-05-screening-patients-with-rosacea-for-small-intestinal-bacteri|Screening
    Patients With Rosacea for Small Intestinal Bacterial Overgrowth.]]'
topics:
- Gastroenterology
- Irritable Bowel Syndrome
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2023-052

A 25-year-old male presents for a pretravel consultation prior to embarking on a 10-day mission trip to Central America with his church. His past medical history includes GERD, irritable bowel syndrome, and generalized anxiety disorder. The last time he traveled internationally he experienced a prolonged bout of traveler’s diarrhea, despite his best efforts at practicing good hand hygiene and careful food and drink selection. He asks if there are any medications that he can take to prevent a similar experience this time. Which one of the following is most appropriate for prophylactic use in this situation?

## Options

**A.** Bismuth subsalicylate (Pepto-Bismol)

**B.** Calcium carbonate (Tums)

**C.** Ciprofloxacin (Cipro)

**D.** Omeprazole

**E.** A probiotic containing Lactobacillus acidophilus

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Bismuth subsalicylate has been shown to decrease the risk of contracting traveler’s diarrhea by 50%–65% and may be considered for patients who are at increased risk. Drawbacks include the frequent dosing of four times daily and the risk of developing a black tongue and black stool. Bismuth subsalicylate is contraindicated in the setting of aspirin allergy, kidney disease, breastfeeding, or concurrent anticoagulant use. Medications that decrease gastric acidity, such as proton pump inhibitors, H2-blockers, and antacids, substantially increase one’s risk of contracting traveler’s diarrhea. Therefore, avoiding calcium carbonate and omeprazole would be preferable for this patient. Prophylactic antibiotics typically are not recommended in this situation although may be considered for those who are at particularly high risk of health complications from a gastrointestinal illness. If a prophylactic antibiotic is desired, rifaximin should be considered. Fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin, however, should be avoided for prophylactic use due to risks of inducing antibiotic resistance and causing central nervous system side effects, QTc prolongation, medication interactions, and tendon injuries. Probiotics have insufficient evidence of benefit for preventing traveler’s diarrhea.

## References

Sanford C, McConnell A, Osborn J. The pretravel consultation. Am Fam Physician . 2016;94(8):620-627. 2) Giddings SL, Stevens AM, Leung DT. Traveler's diarrhea. Med Clin North Am . 2016;100(2):317-330. 3) Riddle MS, Connor BA, Beeching NJ, et al. Guidelines for the prevention and treatment of travelers' diarrhea: a graded expert panel report. J Travel Med. 2017;24(suppl_1):S57-S74.
