---
id: ITE-2024-153
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 153
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.009854
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-153

## Question
An 18 -year-old male with no significant past medical history presents for a sports preparticipation 
evaluation prior to his high school senior football season. On cardiac auscultation, you detect a 
previously undocumented systolic murmur.  
 
Which one of the following additional characteristics of this murmur, if present, would raise conce rn 
for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and necessitate additional testing prior to clearing this patient for 
sports participation?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Decreased intensity with an isometric handgrip
**B)** Decreased intensity with the Valsalva maneuver
**C)** Increased intensity with moving from squatting to standing
**D)** Increased intensity with passive leg raise

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
One of the most important purposes of the sports preparticipation evaluation is to screen for potentially life -threatening cardiovascular conditions. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy is a leading cause of sudden cardiac death in younger athletes, and recognitio n of the typical pathologic murmur that occurs with this condition can identify people who are at risk. The characteristic harsh midsystolic ejection murmur results from a dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction. The murmur intensifies with mane uvers that reduce preload or afterload, which increase the relative obstruction. Moving from squatting to standing, the Valsalva maneuver, and dehydration states all reduce preload and therefore cause the murmur to increase. In contrast, maneuvers that inc rease preload or afterload cause the murmur to soften due to decrease in the relative obstruction. This includes moving from standing to squatting and passive leg raise, which increase preload, and isometric handgrip, which increases afterload.

## References
s Authors/Task Force members; Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the Task Force for the Diagnosis and Management of Hypertrophic Cardiomyopathy of the European Society of Cardiolo gy (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35(39):2733 -2779. Houston BA, Stevens GR. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: a review. Clin Med Insights Cardiol . 2015;8(suppl 1):53 -65. Leggit JC, Whitaker D. Diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: updated guidelines from the ACC/AHA. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(2):207 -209. MacDonald J, Schaefer M, Stumph J. The preparticipation physical evaluation. Am Fam Physician . 2021;103(9):539 -546. Marian AJ, Braunwald E. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetics, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and therapy. Circ Res . 2017;121(7):749 -770.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*