---
id: ITE-2023-072
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 72
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.933771
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: B
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults.
  path: 2024/2024-08-attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.444
  link: '[[2024/2024-08-attention-deficit-hyperactivity-disorder-in-adults|Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
    Disorder in Adults.]]'
- title: Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder in Adults.
  path: 2024/2024-08-attention-deficithyperactivity-disorder-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.444
  link: '[[2024/2024-08-attention-deficithyperactivity-disorder-in-adults|Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity
    Disorder in Adults.]]'
- title: 'Benzodiazepine Use Disorder: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-09-benzodiazepine-use-disorder-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.421
  link: '[[2023/2023-09-benzodiazepine-use-disorder-common-questions-and-answers|Benzodiazepine
    Use Disorder: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Psychological Interventions for Depression and Anxiety in Patients With Coronary
    Heart Disease or Heart Failure.
  path: 2024/2024-12-psychological-interventions-for-depression-and-anxiety-in-pa.md
  similarity: 0.389
  link: '[[2024/2024-12-psychological-interventions-for-depression-and-anxiety-in-pa|Psychological
    Interventions for Depression and Anxiety in Patients With Coronary Heart Disease
    or Heart Failure.]]'
- title: Screening for Anxiety, Depression, and Suicide Risk in Children and Adolescents.
  path: 2024/2024-07-screening-for-anxiety-depression-and-suicide-risk-in-childre.md
  similarity: 0.389
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-screening-for-anxiety-depression-and-suicide-risk-in-childre|Screening
    for Anxiety, Depression, and Suicide Risk in Children and Adolescents.]]'
topics:
- Emergency Medicine
- Infectious Disease
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Sexually Transmitted Infection
---

# Question ITE-2023-072

A 34-year-old female presents to your office and insists that she be seen. She seeks your care frequently, showering you with compliments. Today she says that she feels depressed and hurts “all over.” She reports that your medical assistant is not being friendly to her. She states that her symptoms started a few days ago, after her boyfriend broke up with her. She had thought he would propose soon although they had been dating for 2 months. She says he must have left her because she is unattractive. She asks to be tested for sexually transmitted infections since she frequently engages in unprotected intercourse. She was recently pulled over by a police officer for reckless driving, but states she was being punished unfairly. A physical examination reveals a BMI of 31 kg/m2, stable vital signs, and several scars on her upper arms, but is otherwise unremarkable. She appears anxious and depressed, and as in the past, mentions suicidal thoughts. Your staff asks you if she is just a difficult patient or whether a disease process is involved. Which one of the following is the most likely diagnosis for this patient? 27 29 ---

## Options

**A.** Bipolar disorder

**B.** Borderline personality disorder

**C.** Generalized anxiety disorder

**D.** Major depressive disorder

**E.** Posttraumatic stress disorder

## Answer

**B**

## Explanation

Borderline personality disorder is characterized by pervasive patterns of instability that affect regulation, self-image, and interpersonal relationships. These patients may frequently seek medical care, sabotage healthy behavior, and engage in high-risk sexual behaviors and substance use. These patients also have an increased suicide risk. The hallmark symptoms are unstable interpersonal relationships, chronic suicidal tendencies, a negative self-image, difficulty controlling moods, and marked impulsivity. Patients with borderline personality disorder can also present with vague somatic complaints and chronic pain. It is thought to be caused by a combination of neurobiologic, psychosocial, and genetic factors. Treatment includes a multifaceted approach with psychotherapy being the first-line treatment, but patients do have a high dropout rate. There are no FDA-approved medications for the treatment of borderline personality disorder, although SSRIs and quetiapine are commonly prescribed. Bipolar disorder is characterized by alternating periods of depression and mania or, in the case of bipolar type II, hypomania. The DSM-5 criteria for generalized anxiety disorder include excessive worry and anxiety about many events, difficulty controlling the worry, and three or more of the following symptoms: restlessness, fatigue, concentration difficulty, irritability, muscle tension, and sleep disturbance. The essential feature of posttraumatic stress disorder is the development of characteristic symptoms after experiencing a psychologically traumatic event (or events) outside the range of human experience usually considered to be normal. The characteristic symptoms involve reexperiencing the traumatic event; numbing of responsiveness to, or involvement with, the external world; and a variety of other autonomic, dysphoric, or cognitive symptoms, such as exaggerated startle response, difficulty concentrating, memory impairment, feelings of guilt, and sleep difficulties. Criteria for major depressive disorder include depressed mood, loss of interest or pleasure, appetite or weight changes, sleep disturbances, fatigue, and difficulty concentrating.

## References

Mendez-Miller M, Naccarato J, Radico JA. Borderline personality disorder. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(2):156-161. 29
