---
id: ITE-2023-120
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 120
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.938361
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: E
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Diabetic Peripheral Neuropathy: Prevention and Treatment.'
  path: 2024/2024-03-diabetic-peripheral-neuropathy-prevention-and-treatment.md
  similarity: 0.467
  link: '[[2024/2024-03-diabetic-peripheral-neuropathy-prevention-and-treatment|Diabetic
    Peripheral Neuropathy: Prevention and Treatment.]]'
- title: 'Hip Fractures: Diagnosis and Management.'
  path: 2022/2022-12-hip-fractures-diagnosis-and-management.md
  similarity: 0.438
  link: '[[2022/2022-12-hip-fractures-diagnosis-and-management|Hip Fractures: Diagnosis
    and Management.]]'
- title: 'Diagnosis and Treatment of Diabetes-Related Foot Infections: Guidelines
    From the IWGDF/IDSA.'
  path: 2025/2025-06-diagnosis-and-treatment-of-diabetes-related-foot-infections.md
  similarity: 0.429
  link: '[[2025/2025-06-diagnosis-and-treatment-of-diabetes-related-foot-infections|Diagnosis
    and Treatment of Diabetes-Related Foot Infections: Guidelines From the IWGDF/IDSA.]]'
- title: Evaluation and Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting in Adults.
  path: 2024/2024-05-evaluation-and-treatment-of-nausea-and-vomiting-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.4
  link: '[[2024/2024-05-evaluation-and-treatment-of-nausea-and-vomiting-in-adults|Evaluation
    and Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting in Adults.]]'
- title: Screening for Chlamydia and Gonorrhea.
  path: 2022/2022-07-screening-for-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea.md
  similarity: 0.385
  link: '[[2022/2022-07-screening-for-chlamydia-and-gonorrhea|Screening for Chlamydia
    and Gonorrhea.]]'
topics:
- Emergency Medicine
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2023-120

A 48-year-old male presents to the emergency department for an initial episode of acute gallstone pancreatitis with a lipase level of 700 U/L (N 10–140). A right upper quadrant ultrasound shows gallstones within the gallbladder but is otherwise normal. He is treated with intravenous fluids and medications to control pain and nausea, and is admitted to a regular medical floor bed. The next morning he reports that his symptoms are improving with oral medications. A physical examination is notable for normal vital signs and mild epigastric tenderness. A comprehensive metabolic panel shows improving leukocytosis and stable parameters including a normal bilirubin level. Which one of the following management options is most appropriate in this situation? (ERCP) 45 47 ---

## Options

**A.** Rechecking a serum lipase level and starting oral feeding if the result is normal

**B.** Initiating enteral feeding through a nasojejunal tube

**C.** Initiating parenteral feeding through an intravenous line

**D.** Consulting a gastroenterologist for endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography

**E.** Consulting a general surgeon for cholecystectomy during this admission

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

When compared to delayed cholecystectomy, early cholecystectomy has been shown to decrease complications, hospital readmission rates, and length of hospital stay without increasing surgical complication rates. Therefore, patients with mild acute gallstone pancreatitis should be considered for cholecystectomy during the index admission (SOR B). Evidence also supports early enteral feeding as tolerated, as opposed to restricted oral intake (SOR A). In this case, the patient should be offered oral feeding without a repeat serum lipase level factoring into this decision. Both placement of an enteral feeding tube and initiation of parenteral nutrition would be inappropriate, given the evidence to support early oral feeding. The risks of parenteral feeding include longer hospitalization and increased rates of infection, multiorgan failure, and mortality when compared to enteral feeding (SOR A). Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) within 24 hours is indicated when acute pancreatitis is complicated by cholangitis or persistent biliary tract obstruction, but otherwise it is not indicated.

## References

Crockett SD, Wani S, Gardner TB, Falck-Ytter Y, Barkun AN; American Gastroenterological Association Institute Clinical Guidelines Committee. American Gastroenterological Association Institute guideline on initial management of acute pancreatitis. Gastroenterology . 2018;154(4):1096-1101. 2) Oppenlander KE, Chadwick C, Carman K. Acute pancreatitis: rapid evidence review. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(1):44-50.
