---
id: ITE-2024-038
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 38
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:40.897692
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.31
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.31
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:25.786420'
---

# Question ITE-2024-038

## Question
Which one of the following findings on a HINTS (head -impulse, nystagmus, test of skew) 
examination suggests a central etiology for a patient with vertigo?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Saccade when the patient’s head is thrust 10° to the right and left while the patient’s eyes are fixed on the examiner’s nose
**B)** Spontaneous nystagmus that is unidirectional and horizontal
**C)** Suppression of nystagmus with visual fixation
**D)** Vertical deviation upon uncovering a covered eye while the patient is looking straight ahead

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
The HINTS (head -impulse, nystagmus, test of skew) examination can help determine whether the etiology of vertigo is peripheral or central. When performed by trained clinicians, it is highly sensitive and specific in identifying central causes such as acute stroke. For a test of skew the patient looks straight ahead while each eye is covered and uncovered. Vertical deviation of a covered eye after uncovering suggests a central etiology. Findings that are suggestive of peripheral causes of vertigo include spontaneous nystagmus that is unidirectional and horizontal, suppression of nystagmus with visual fixation, and saccade (rapid movement of both eyes where the gaze overcorrects to keep focused on the examiner) when the patient’s head is thrust 10° to the righ t and left while the patient’s eyes are fixed on the examiner’s nose.

## References
Muncie HL, Sirmans SM, James E. Dizziness: approach to evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2017;95(3):154 -162.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*