---
id: ITE-2024-001
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 1
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.574703
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Endocrinology
related_articles:
topics:
- Endocrinology
- Psychiatry
- Nephrology
---

# Question ITE-2024-001

## Question
A 34 -year-old female with intellectual disability, hypothyroidism, and bipolar disorder presents for 
routine follow -up. Her case worker notes that she has been excessively thirsty and urinating more 
than usual over the past several months despite limiting her fluids. She also wakes at night to urinate. 
Laboratory studies prior to her visit reveal a therapeutic lithium level, as well as normal creatinine, 
electrolyte, and blood glucose levels.   
 
Which one of the following is most likely present in this patient’s case?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Diabetes insipidus
**B)** Interstitial cystitis
**C)** Overactive bladder
**D)** Psychogenic polydipsia
**E)** Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
This patient is at risk for both psychogenic polydipsia due to intellectual disability and nephrogenic diabetes insipidus due to lithium therapy. The combination of ongoing polydipsia, polyuria despite fluid restriction, and nocturia suggests diabetes insipidus rather than psychogenic polydipsia. Diabetes insipidus is a loss of free water in the urine due to a lack of antidiuretic hormone (central) or insensitivity to antidiuretic hormone in the kidney (nephrogenic). Interstit ial cystitis and overactive bladder can cause urinary frequency but not polydipsia. Syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion (SIADH) is associated with a low sodium level and does not cause polyuria.

## References
Levy M, Prentice M, Wass J. Diabetes insipidus. BMJ. 2019;364:l321.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*