---
id: ITE-2023-122
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 122
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.938513
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: D
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Substance Misuse in Adults: A Primary Care Approach.'
  path: 2024/2024-05-substance-misuse-in-adults-a-primary-care-approach.md
  similarity: 1.0
  link: '[[2024/2024-05-substance-misuse-in-adults-a-primary-care-approach|Substance
    Misuse in Adults: A Primary Care Approach.]]'
- title: 'Carpal Tunnel Syndrome: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2024/2024-07-carpal-tunnel-syndrome-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 1.0
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-carpal-tunnel-syndrome-rapid-evidence-review|Carpal Tunnel
    Syndrome: Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Osteoporosis: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-03-osteoporosis-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.833
  link: '[[2023/2023-03-osteoporosis-common-questions-and-answers|Osteoporosis: Common
    Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Similar Rates of Autism With Lamotrigine, Topiramate, and No Treatment; Rate
    With Valproate Is Higher.
  path: 2024/2024-07-similar-rates-of-autism-with-lamotrigine-topiramate-and-no-t.md
  similarity: 0.8
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-similar-rates-of-autism-with-lamotrigine-topiramate-and-no-t|Similar
    Rates of Autism With Lamotrigine, Topiramate, and No Treatment; Rate With Valproate
    Is Higher.]]'
- title: The Evolution of Evidence-Based Medicine in American Family Physician.
  path: 2025/2025-03-the-evolution-of-evidence-based-medicine-in-american-family.md
  similarity: 0.8
  link: '[[2025/2025-03-the-evolution-of-evidence-based-medicine-in-american-family|The
    Evolution of Evidence-Based Medicine in American Family Physician.]]'
topics:
- Ankle Pain
- Emergency Medicine
- Orthopedics
- Pharmacology
---

# Question ITE-2023-122

A 35-year-old female presents with a 2-week history of right posteromedial foot and ankle pain. The pain began during a vacation that included several days of sightseeing and hiking. She does not have a history of acute injury or trauma. Her pain is worse with weight bearing and improves with relative rest and ibuprofen use. A physical examination reveals soft-tissue swelling and tenderness along the posterior edge of the medial malleolus into the medial arch of the foot. Standing alignment, range of motion, a strength assessment, and neurovascular testing are normal. Her symptoms are unchanged by gentle, repetitive tapping over the posteromedial ankle. Which one of the following is the most likely diagnosis?

## Options

**A.** A deltoid ligament sprain

**B.** A medial malleolar stress fracture

**C.** Peroneal tendinopathy

**D.** Posterior tibialis tendinopathy

**E.** Tarsal tunnel syndrome

## Answer

**D**

## Explanation

This is a typical presentation for posterior tibialis tendinopathy, a common overuse injury that presents with pain in the posteromedial foot and ankle in the distribution of the posterior tibialis tendon. If not identified and treated early, patients may develop more progressive posterior tibialis tendon dysfunction and eventual arch collapse of the foot. Deltoid ligament sprains present with pain over the medial ankle ligament complex after an acute ankle injury involving an eversion mechanism. A medial malleolar stress fracture would present with pain and bony tenderness over the medial malleolus, rather than over the course of the posterior tibialis tendon as described in this scenario. Peroneal tendon injuries may occur with overuse or an acute injury, although the pain is lateral rather than medial. Tarsal tunnel syndrome is caused by compression neuropathy due to pressure on the posterior tibial nerve and presents with pain, burning, tingling, and/or numbness in the medial midfoot and medial heel. As with posterior tibialis tendinopathy, the pain from tarsal tunnel syndrome is often worse with prolonged weight bearing. Symptoms can be reproduced by tapping over the nerve (Tinel sign), which does not occur with posterior tibialis tendinopathy. The negative Tinel sign described in this scenario is more consistent with posterior tibialis tendinopathy than tarsal tunnel syndrome.

## References

Tu P. Heel pain: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician . 2018;97(2):86-93. 2) Deu RS, Coslick AM, Dreher G. Tendinopathies of the foot and ankle. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(5):479-486.
