---
id: ITE-2022-133
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 133
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.666914
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2022"]
answer: C
difficulty: Basic
topics: []
---

# Question ITE-2022-133

In the U.S. legal system, which one of the following is a required finding to determine that medical malpractice has occurred?

## Options

**A.** Conflict of interest

**B.** A financial charge rendered to the patient

**C.** A causal relationship between breach of duty and injury to the patient

**D.** Presentation of the case to a grand jury

**E.** Testimony from an expert witness for the plaintiff

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

For a physician to be found guilty of medical malpractice in the United States, the plaintiff must show that the physician acted negligently in providing care and that the negligence resulted in injury. Determining this requires proof of the following four legal components: (1) a professional duty owed to the patient; (2) a breach of said duty; (3) an injury caused by the breach; and (4) resulting damages. Although physicians are legally required to disclose conflicts of interest, having a conflict of interest is not an essential element in a malpractice decision. Malpractice may occur even if the patient is not rendered a financial charge, provided that the four essential criteria are met. Medical malpractice cases that are not settled or otherwise dismissed proceed to a jury trial, not to a grand jury. Grand juries are part of the criminal indictment process and are not relevant to medical malpractice cases. While expert witness testimony is often used in a malpractice case, typically to help establish whether there has been a breach of a professional standard of care, such testimony is not a requirement for a medical malpractice decision.

## References

- Bal BS: An introduction to medical malpractice in the United States. Clin Orthop Relat Res 2009;467(2):339-347. 2) Kass JS, Rose RV: Medical malpractice reform—Historical approaches, alternative models, and communication and resolution programs. AMA J Ethics 2016;18(3):299-310. 53
