---
id: ITE-2024-130
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 130
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.769142
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
- Endocrinology
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2024-130

## Question
A 77 -year-old female with a medical history of atrial fibrillation, COPD, depression, and 
hypothyroidism presents for follow -up of a recent visit to the emergency department (ED) for a fall in 
which she hit her head on the edge of a dresser. CT of the head in the ED was negative for 
intracranial bleeding and she received staples for a scalp laceration.  
Which one of the following medications in this patient's current regimen is most likely to increase her 
fall risk?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Apixaban (Eliquis)
**B)** A budesonide/formoterol inhaler (Symbicort)
**C)** Fluoxetine (Prozac)
**D)** for a fall in which she hit her head on the edge of a dresser. CT of the head in the ED was negative for intracranial bleeding and she received staples for a scalp laceration. Which one of the followi
**E)** Prednisone

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
Use of an SSRI has been found to increase fall risk in older persons. While anticoagulants such as apixaban increase the risk for bleeding from fall -related injuries, they are recommended to prevent stroke in patients with atrial fibrillation regardless of fall risk and have not been noted to increase the risk of falling. Budesonide/formoterol, levothyroxine, and prednisone have not been associated with an increased fall risk.

## References
s Marcum ZA, Perera S, Thorpe JM, et al. Antidepressant use and recurrent falls in community -dwelling older adults: findings from the Health ABC Study. Ann Pharmacother . 2016;50(7):525 -533. Moncada LVV, Mire LG. Preventing falls in older persons. Am Fam Physician . 2017;96(4):240 -247. The 2023 American Geriatrics Society Beers Criteria Update Expert Panel. American Geriatrics Society 2023 updated AGS Beers criteria for potentially inappropriate medication use in older adults. J Am Geriatr Soc . 2023;71(7):2052 -2081.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*