---
id: ITE-2024-184
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 184
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.307141
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Gastroenterology
related_articles:
topics:
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-184

## Question
A 20 -year-old female is brought to the emergency department after experiencing blunt abdominal 
trauma during a motor vehicle accident. A focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) 
examination is performed at the bedside and there are no signs of internal bleeding.  
 
Based on these results, which one of the following should be the next step in evaluation?

## Answer Choices
**A)** No further imaging to evaluate for internal bleeding
**B)** Additional imaging only if the patient develops signs of hemodynamic compromise
**C)** Additional imaging to confirm the absence of bleeding
**D)** Diagnostic peritoneal lavage

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
The focused assessment with sonography for trauma (FAST) evaluates the pericardium and 3 potential spaces within the peritoneal cavity for hemoperitoneum and hemopericardium. This bedside examination can be completed in less than 5 minutes, so it is ideal for emergency department settings. FAST has replaced diagnostic peritoneal lavage as a bedside evaluation for bleeding. A Cochrane review found that FAST has a 96% specificity but only a 74% sensitivity for detecting internal bleeding. The sensitivity in c hildren was found to be even lower at 62%. Therefore, while a positive result will almost always be reliable and should prompt immediate bleeding control measures, a negative result carries the risk of being a false negative and must be confirmed by additi onal imaging such as CT.

## References
s Arnold MJ, Jonas CE, Carter RE. Point -of-care ultrasonography. Am Fam Physician . 2020;101(5):275 -285. Stengel D, Leisterer J, Ferrada P, Ekkernkamp A, Mutze S, Hoenning A. Point -of-care ultrasonography for diagnosing thoracoabdominal injuries in patients with blunt trauma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2018;12(12):CD012669.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*