---
id: ITE-2023-056
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 56
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.932452
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: E
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Polycystic Ovary Syndrome: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-03-polycystic-ovary-syndrome-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.318
  link: '[[2023/2023-03-polycystic-ovary-syndrome-common-questions-and-answers|Polycystic
    Ovary Syndrome: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: 'Acute Abdominal Pain in Children: Evaluation and Management.'
  path: 2024/2024-12-acute-abdominal-pain-in-children-evaluation-and-management.md
  similarity: 0.317
  link: '[[2024/2024-12-acute-abdominal-pain-in-children-evaluation-and-management|Acute
    Abdominal Pain in Children: Evaluation and Management.]]'
- title: 'Systemic Lupus Erythematosus: Diagnosis and Treatment.'
  path: 2023/2023-04-systemic-lupus-erythematosus-diagnosis-and-treatment.md
  similarity: 0.317
  link: '[[2023/2023-04-systemic-lupus-erythematosus-diagnosis-and-treatment|Systemic
    Lupus Erythematosus: Diagnosis and Treatment.]]'
- title: 'Galactorrhea: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-12-galactorrhea-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.314
  link: '[[2022/2022-12-galactorrhea-rapid-evidence-review|Galactorrhea: Rapid Evidence
    Review.]]'
- title: 'Peripheral Edema: Evaluation and Management in Primary Care.'
  path: 2022/2022-11-peripheral-edema-evaluation-and-management-in-primary-care.md
  similarity: 0.297
  link: '[[2022/2022-11-peripheral-edema-evaluation-and-management-in-primary-care|Peripheral
    Edema: Evaluation and Management in Primary Care.]]'
topics:
- Abdominal Pain
- Blood Pressure
- Cardiology
- Emergency Medicine
- Gastroenterology
- Nephrology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Preventive Medicine
---

# Question ITE-2023-056

A 16-year-old female sees you because she has not yet started her menses and has noticed little breast development. Both her mother and her older sister started menstruating at age 13. She has never been sexually active and has not had any abdominal pain, vaginal discharge, nipple discharge, appetite changes, or urinary symptoms. She does not take any medications and does not use tobacco, alcohol, or illicit substances. Her weight has been stable. She walks to and from school daily and plays recreational basketball during the winter season, but otherwise does not get regular exercise. On examination the patient appears well. She has a blood pressure of 110/70 mm Hg and a heart rate of 70 beats/min, and she is in the 5th percentile for height and 50th percentile for weight. Cardiovascular, pulmonary, abdominal, and skin examinations are all normal. Her breast development is Tanner stage 2 and her genitourinary development is Tanner stage 4, with normal external genitalia and a normal-appearing nulliparous cervix. There is no edema to the extremities. Laboratory studies include a normal TSH level, prolactin level, and basic metabolic panel. A urine pregnancy test is negative. Pelvic ultrasonography reveals a normal uterus and the ovaries are nonvisualized. Which one of the following is the most likely diagnosis? 21 23 ---

## Options

**A.** Congenital adrenal hyperplasia

**B.** Cushing syndrome

**C.** Functional hypothalamic amenorrhea

**D.** Polycystic ovary syndrome

**E.** Turner syndrome

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

Turner syndrome is the most likely cause of this patient’s primary amenorrhea. Turner syndrome is characterized by a lack of normal X chromosome gene expression (45,X karyotype) and is estimated to occur in 1/3000 births. Females with Turner syndrome have ovarian sex hormone insufficiency, which leads to delayed puberty. Delayed diagnosis of Turner syndrome is common, and short stature and delayed puberty are sometimes the only symptoms. Diagnosis is made via karyotyping. Individuals with congenital adrenal hyperplasia would most likely have other signs, including clitoromegaly. Similarly, individuals with Cushing syndrome will have other features such as a dorsocervical fat pad and a rounded, swollen facial appearance. There is nothing in this patient’s history or physical examination to suggest functional hypothalamic amenorrhea given that her weight is normal and has not changed recently. Polycystic ovary syndrome more typically presents with oligomenorrhea rather than primary amenorrhea.

## References

Klein DA, Paradise SL, Reeder RM. Amenorrhea: a systematic approach to diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician . 2019;100(1):39-48. 22
