---
id: ITE-2023-123
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 123
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.938584
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: C
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Atrial Fibrillation: Common Questions and Answers About Diagnosis and Treatment.'
  path: 2024/2024-05-atrial-fibrillation-common-questions-and-answers-about-diagn.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2024/2024-05-atrial-fibrillation-common-questions-and-answers-about-diagn|Atrial
    Fibrillation: Common Questions and Answers About Diagnosis and Treatment.]]'
- title: 'Common Types of Supraventricular Tachycardia: Diagnosis and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-06-common-types-of-supraventricular-tachycardia-diagnosis-and-m.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-common-types-of-supraventricular-tachycardia-diagnosis-and-m|Common
    Types of Supraventricular Tachycardia: Diagnosis and Management.]]'
- title: 'Palpitations: Evaluation, Management, and Wearable Smart Devices.'
  path: 2024/2024-09-palpitations-evaluation-management-and-wearable-smart-device.md
  similarity: 0.45
  link: '[[2024/2024-09-palpitations-evaluation-management-and-wearable-smart-device|Palpitations:
    Evaluation, Management, and Wearable Smart Devices.]]'
- title: Exercise-Based Cardiac Rehabilitation for Adults With Heart Failure.
  path: 2025/2025-03-exercise-based-cardiac-rehabilitation-for-adults-with-heart.md
  similarity: 0.429
  link: '[[2025/2025-03-exercise-based-cardiac-rehabilitation-for-adults-with-heart|Exercise-Based
    Cardiac Rehabilitation for Adults With Heart Failure.]]'
- title: 'Management of Atrial Fibrillation: Guidelines From the American College
    of Cardiology and American Heart Association.'
  path: 2025/2025-02-management-of-atrial-fibrillation-guidelines-from-the-americ.md
  similarity: 0.429
  link: '[[2025/2025-02-management-of-atrial-fibrillation-guidelines-from-the-americ|Management
    of Atrial Fibrillation: Guidelines From the American College of Cardiology and
    American Heart Association.]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2023-123

A 25-year-old male with no significant past medical history comes to your office to establish care. A physical examination reveals a cardiac murmur that has not been documented previously. Which one of the following findings would be most concerning for hypertrophic cardiomyopathy as the cause of his murmur?

## Options

**A.** A diastolic murmur that increases in the left lateral decubitus position

**B.** A systolic murmur that increases with an isometric handgrip

**C.** A systolic murmur that increases when moving from squatting to standing

**D.** A systolic murmur that decreases with the Valsalva maneuver

**E.** A fixed split of the second heart sound

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) is the leading cause of sudden cardiac death in young people. HCM often presents with symptoms related to exertion, including dyspnea, chest pain, palpitations, or syncope, although it also may be discovered incidentally based on its characteristic findings on physical examination and/or EKG abnormalities. Because only 30%–60% of people with HCM are found to have a genetic variant, family physicians play a key role in the early detection of new cases. The cardiac structural changes with HCM usually lead to a dynamic left ventricular outflow tract obstruction (LVOTO) that worsens with decreased preload and decreased afterload states. An LVOTO causes a harsh midsystolic ejection murmur that intensifies with exertion or with provocative maneuvers that increase contractility or decrease cardiac preload and/or afterload. One such method is to have the patient move from a squatting position to a standing position. This leads to temporary pooling of blood in the legs, decreasing venous return and preload and thereby increasing the relative obstruction and the intensity of the murmur. The Valsalva maneuver also causes reduced preload by decreasing left ventricular filling, thus increasing the relative obstruction and the murmur intensity. An isometric handgrip, in contrast, increases afterload and decreases the obstruction, resulting in a softer murmur. A diastolic murmur that increases in the left lateral decubitus position is associated with aortic regurgitation. A fixed split of the second heart sound occurs due to an atrial septal defect.

## References

Authors/Task Force members, Elliott PM, Anastasakis A, et al. 2014 ESC guidelines on diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: the task force for the diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Eur Heart J . 2014;35(39):2733-2779. 2) Marian AJ, Braunwald E. Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: genetics, pathogenesis, clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and therapy. Circ Res. 2017;121(7):749-770. 3) Leggit JC, Whitaker D. Diagnosis and management of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy: updated guidelines from the ACC/AHA. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(2):207-209. 48
