---
id: ITE-2024-189
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 189
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:42.351562
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.507
  link: '[[2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.407
  link: '[[2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.406
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: fatigue adults
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults.md
  similarity: 0.404
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults|fatigue adults]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.404
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:22.374983'
---

# Question ITE-2024-189

## Question
A 44 -year-old male presents for evaluation of left shoulder pain and stiffness that has developed 
gradually over the past few months after a fall while skiing. He describes a dull, deep, poorly 
localized ache. On examination he has impaired active and passive range of motion in all planes. 
Radiography of the shoulder is unremarkable.  
 
Which one of the following is most likely to lead to symptom resolution?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Wearing a sling on the left arm for 4 –6 weeks
**B)** Extracorporeal shock wave therapy
**C)** Biceps tendon sheath injection and physical therapy
**D)** Glenohumeral corticosteroid injection and physical therapy
**E)** Surgical repair

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
This patient presents with adhesive capsulitis, manifested as the typical cardinal symptoms of pain, stiffness, and dysfunction of the affected shoulder. A combination of glenohumeral or subacromial corticosteroid injection and physical therapy is most lik ely to produce early and sustained improvement in symptoms and joint functioning. Prolonged use of a sling would worsen the condition. Referral for surgery may be indicated after a 3 -month trial of conservative treatment fails. While extracorporeal shock w ave therapy has shown benefit for frozen shoulder, its current role is as an adjunct to other primary therapies.

## References
s Ramirez J. Adhesive capsulitis: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician . 2019;99(5):297 -300. Zhang R, Wang Z, Liu R, Zhang N, Guo J, Huang Y. Extracorporeal shockwave therapy as an adjunctive therapy for frozen shoulder: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Orthop J Sports Med . 2022:10(2).

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*