---
id: ITE-2024-004
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 4
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.601153
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: E
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
---

# Question ITE-2024-004

## Question
A 48 -year-old female with a history of ductal carcinoma in situ diagnosed in her early 40s presents to 
the urgent care clinic because of heavy vaginal bleeding. The bleeding started 8 days ago as a regular 
menstrual period, but it has worsened and today she started passing clots. She  does not take any 
medications.  
 You estimate her blood loss to be >100 mL today. On examination she has a blood pressure of 114/65 mm Hg and a pulse rate of 84 beats/min. The uterus is slightly enlarged with red blood in the os, but the examination findings are otherwise normal. A CBC is significant for a hemoglobin level 
of 8.2 g/dL (N 12.0 –16.0) and a normal platelet count. An hCG test is negative.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate therapy at this time?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Oral high -dose progestins
**B)** Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo -Provera CI)
**C)** Intravenous conjugated estrogen
**D)** Intravenous ketorolac
**E)** Intravenous tranexamic acid

## Correct Answer
**E**

## Explanation
Intravenous tranexamic acid is an appropriate therapeutic option to manage acute bleeding in this hemodynamically stable patient with acute severe uterine bleeding. Intravenous conjugated estrogen is recommended in patients who are hemodynamically unstable . Depot medroxyprogesterone acetate and NSAID therapies are recommended for chronic management. A history of ductal carcinoma in situ is a contraindication for both progestin and estrogen therapy. Estrogens or tranexamic acid should be avoided in patients with a high thrombosis risk.

## References
Wouk N, Helton M. Abnormal uterine bleeding in premenopausal women. Am Fam Physician . 2019;99(7):435 -443.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*