---
id: ITE-2023-007
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 7
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.928279
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: D
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Genital Warts: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2025/2025-02-genital-warts-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.474
  link: '[[2025/2025-02-genital-warts-rapid-evidence-review|Genital Warts: Rapid Evidence
    Review.]]'
- title: Approach to Developmental Screening and Surveillance in Young Children.
  path: 2025/2025-07-approach-to-developmental-screening-and-surveillance-in-youn.md
  similarity: 0.421
  link: '[[2025/2025-07-approach-to-developmental-screening-and-surveillance-in-youn|Approach
    to Developmental Screening and Surveillance in Young Children.]]'
- title: 'Dog and Cat Bites: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-dog-and-cat-bites-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.417
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-dog-and-cat-bites-rapid-evidence-review|Dog and Cat Bites:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Sudden Infant Death Syndrome: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2025/2025-02-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.412
  link: '[[2025/2025-02-sudden-infant-death-syndrome-common-questions-and-answers|Sudden
    Infant Death Syndrome: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Potential Downstream Harms of Routine Temperature Measurements in Well-Appearing
    Infants.
  path: 2025/2025-03-potential-downstream-harms-of-routine-temperature-measuremen.md
  similarity: 0.412
  link: '[[2025/2025-03-potential-downstream-harms-of-routine-temperature-measuremen|Potential
    Downstream Harms of Routine Temperature Measurements in Well-Appearing Infants.]]'
topics:
- Hematology/Oncology
- Nephrology
- Pediatrics
- Preventive Medicine
---

# Question ITE-2023-007

A first-time mother brings her 12-month-old to your office for a well child check. She and the child’s father are both your patients as well. Upon routine screening for anemia, you discover the infant has microcytic anemia with elevated red cell distribution width. You ask the parent about the child’s diet. She looks down at the floor, exhibiting poor eye contact and a flat affect, and responds that she does not shop or cook often. She says the child is happy when eating just applesauce and milk. The mother reports that she has been unmotivated and crying frequently. In addition to checking the child’s lead level and starting iron supplementation, which one of the following would be the most important next step to help this dyad? 3 5 ---

## Options

**A.** Providing reassurance and validation for the mother

**B.** Educating the mother about nutrition and the importance of iron-rich foods for the child

**C.** Notifying the child’s father

**D.** Evaluating and treating the mother for postpartum depression

**E.** Referring the mother to a psychiatrist

## Answer

**D**

## Explanation

Postpartum depression is common and patients who have given birth should be screened for a minimum of 1 year. A mother who knows what to feed an infant may have trouble executing it because of severe postpartum depression, leading to poor infant feeding practices. In this case, the provider will be more likely to successfully treat the child’s anemia by treating the mother’s postpartum depression. While mothers with depression often need encouragement and support, false reassurance is paternalistic and potentially harmful. Education of the mother is sometimes useful, but studies have demonstrated that the more likely barrier to implementing her knowledge is not a need for education on infant nutrition, but rather severe depression or other psychosocial barriers. It is ideal to involve all caretakers in efforts to support a child’s health, but a number of steps need to be taken prior to calling the father, including screening for domestic violence, checking on HIPAA consents, and asking about custody. Referring the mother to a psychiatrist may ultimately be helpful but puts unnecessary barriers in place for the testing and treatment of postpartum depression.

## References

Weinfield NS, Anderson CE. Postpartum symptoms of depression are related to infant feeding practices in a national WIC sample. J Nutr Educ Behav . 2022;54(2):118-124. 3
