---
id: ITE-2024-178
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 178
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.253010
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Infectious Disease
related_articles:
topics:
- Infectious Disease
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-178

## Question
A 62 -year-old female sees you for evaluation of pain and stiffness in her neck. For several years she 
has attributed these symptoms to the aging process, but she has recently developed a loss of dexterity 
in her hands that makes typing and knitting difficult. She does not have any loss of sensation or 
weakness i n her extremities but has noticed some difficulties with balance in recent weeks. The pain 
does not radiate, and she does not have any history of recent trauma. She feels well otherwise and has 
not had any fevers, chills, bowel incontinence, or bladder inc ontinence. 
 
On examination you note mild tenderness of the spinous processes and paraspinous muscles of the 
cervical spine without focal tenderness. Her range of motion at the neck is limited due to pain. There 
are brisk reflexes in the bilateral upper and  lower extremities and a positive Hoffman sign bilaterally 
with 4 beats of clonus on the right and 5 on the left. Her strength and sensation to light touch are 


## Answer Choices
**A)** Facet joint arthropathy
**B)** Myelopathy
**C)** Radiculopathy
**D)** Vertebral compression fracture
**E)** Vertebral osteomyelitis

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
The patient history and physical examination findings are most consistent with degenerative cervical myelopathy, a condition in which spinal cord dysfunction develops due to compression in the neck. Spinal cord compression can be due to disk herniation, ligament hypertrophy, or osteophyte formation, sometimes collectively called spondylosis. Symptoms can initially be nonspecific and subtle, and they can overlap with less serious conditions. Loss of hand dexterity, ataxia, and urinary urgency can be signs of spinal cord compression and warrant a comprehensive neurologic examination. The development of upper motor neuron signs including hyperreflexia, a positive Hoffmann sign (digital reflex of the fingers), and clonus are key findings that warrant urgent eval uation with MRI. Facet joint arthropathy causes more focal pain and is not associated with neurologic symptoms. Cervical radiculopathy involves compression of the nerve root rather than the spinal cord. Symptoms include shooting pain with sensory changes and weakness in a dermatomal distribution. A vertebral compression fracture leads to focal pain in the neck at the site of the fracture without neurologic symptoms. Osteomyelitis also causes more focal pain in the setting of systemic symptoms such as malaise and fever. Referenc es Childress MA, Stuek SJ. Neck pain: initial evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2020;102(3):150 -156. Davies BM, Mowforth OD, Smith EK, Kotter MRN. Degenerative cervical myelopathy. BMJ. 2018;360:k186.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*