---
id: ITE-2024-069
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 69
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.176176
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.511
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.51
  link: '[[2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.504
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.411
  link: '[[2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: fatigue adults
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults.md
  similarity: 0.407
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-fatigue-adults|fatigue adults]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:25.285105'
---

# Question ITE-2024-069

## Question
A 42 -year-old female presents with a 4 -month history of diffuse pain, fatigue, and sleep disturbances. 
She says that the pain is the most bothersome symptom. After an extensive history and physical 
examination, you determine that fibromyalgia is the most likely underlying cause. In addition to encouraging exercise and cognitive behavioral therapy, you opt to initiate pharmacotherapy.  
 
Which one of the following  pharmacologic agents is most likely to improve her pain?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Acetaminophen
**B)** Gabapentin (Neurontin)
**C)** Naproxen
**D)** Pregabalin (Lyrica)
**E)** Tramadol

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
Fibromyalgia is a chronic pain syndrome associated with the disordered processing of pain. It affects approximately 2% of people in the United States, and women are diagnosed 2 –14 times more frequently than men. While patient education, exercise, and cogni tive behavioral therapy can improve pain and functioning (SOR A), nonpharmacologic measures often do not provide sufficient symptom relief. Pharmacologic agents with proven benefit to treat fibromyalgia pain include pregabalin, amitriptyline, duloxetine, a nd milnacipran (SOR A). Pregabalin reduces pain by up to 50% with a number needed to treat of 10. There is insufficient evidence to recommend acetaminophen and gabapentin. NSAIDs and opioids do not have demonstrated benefits. An adequate trial consists of a single medication that is started at a low dosage, slowly increased until a therapeutic dosage is achieved, and maintained for at least 3 months. Satisfactory treatment should be continued for at least 12 months.

## References
Winslow BT, Vandal C, Dang L. Fibromyalgia: diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician . 2023;107(2):137 -144.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*