---
id: ITE-2023-090
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 90
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.935496
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Common Foot Fractures.
  path: 2024/2024-02-common-foot-fractures.md
  similarity: 0.583
  link: '[[2024/2024-02-common-foot-fractures|Common Foot Fractures.]]'
- title: 'Acute Monoarthritis: Diagnosis in Adults.'
  path: 2025/2025-06-acute-monoarthritis-diagnosis-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.538
  link: '[[2025/2025-06-acute-monoarthritis-diagnosis-in-adults|Acute Monoarthritis:
    Diagnosis in Adults.]]'
- title: Fever and Skin Rash.
  path: 2023/2023-06-fever-and-skin-rash.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-fever-and-skin-rash|Fever and Skin Rash.]]'
- title: 'Injections of the Hand and Wrist: Part I. Trigger Finger, First Carpometacarpal
    Joint Osteoarthritis, and Palmar Fibromatosis.'
  path: 2024/2024-10-injections-of-the-hand-and-wrist-part-i-trigger-finger-first.md
  similarity: 0.467
  link: '[[2024/2024-10-injections-of-the-hand-and-wrist-part-i-trigger-finger-first|Injections
    of the Hand and Wrist: Part I. Trigger Finger, First Carpometacarpal Joint Osteoarthritis,
    and Palmar Fibromatosis.]]'
- title: Acute Shoulder Injuries in Adults.
  path: 2023/2023-05-acute-shoulder-injuries-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.455
  link: '[[2023/2023-05-acute-shoulder-injuries-in-adults|Acute Shoulder Injuries
    in Adults.]]'
topics:
- Dermatology
- Emergency Medicine
- Infectious Disease
- Joint Pain
- Orthopedics
- Pediatrics
- Rheumatology
---

# Question ITE-2023-090

A 70-year-old male presents with an acutely painful, swollen right knee that developed over 2–3 days without any known cause. There is no other joint pain. He has had similar, less severe episodes off and on in the past. He feels well otherwise and has not had any fever, chills, or rash. Examination of other joints is negative except for some degenerative changes of the distal interphalangeal joints of the fingers. Examination of the right knee is notable for warmth, redness, diffuse tenderness, and swelling. There is no evidence of knee instability, meniscal injury, or trauma. A knee x-ray shows soft-tissue swelling and chondrocalcinosis (calcification of the cartilage). Knee aspiration is performed and a synovial fluid Gram stain is negative for bacteria with other results pending. Which one of the following is the most likely explanation for these knee findings? 34 36 ---

## Options

**A.** Calcium pyrophosphate deposition disease (pseudogout)

**B.** Gout

**C.** Osteoarthritis

**D.** Psoriatic arthritis

**E.** Septic arthritis

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

These symptoms and radiographic findings are most consistent with calcium pyrophosphate deposition (CPPD) disease, also known as pseudogout. CPPD disease is an asymmetric, inflammatory, pauciarticular arthritis most frequently involving the knee, wrist, or first metatarsophalangeal joint. Inflammatory symptoms include erythema, warmth, swelling, and tenderness. The differential diagnosis includes CPPD disease, gout, and septic arthritis. The chondrocalcinosis, or calcification of the cartilage, is characteristic of CPPD disease and not gout. On polarized microscopy of joint fluid, CPPD disease is confirmed by positively birefringent crystals whereas gout is confirmed by negatively birefringent crystals. Osteoarthritis is noninflammatory in nature. There is no history of psoriasis in this patient and the history and physical examination are not suggestive of psoriatic arthritis. Septic arthritis is less likely as this patient’s Gram stain is negative for bacteria and the patient has not had a fever.

## References

Johnson MW. Acute knee effusions: a systematic approach to diagnosis. Am Fam Physician . 2000;61(8):2391-2400. 2) Swagerty DL Jr, Hellinger D. Radiographic assessment of osteoarthritis. Am Fam Physician . 2001;64(2):279-286. 3) Eggebeen AT. Gout: an update. Am Fam Physician . 2007;76(6):801-808. 4) American Academy of Family Physicians. Information from your family doctor. Gout: what you should know. Am Fam Physician . 2007;76(6):811-812. 5) Pujalte GG, Albano-Aluquin SA. Differential diagnosis of polyarticular arthritis. Am Fam Physician . 2015;92(1):35-41.
