---
id: ITE-2024-183
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 183
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:42.298433
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: E
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.311
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.31
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.306
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:38.876212'
---

# Question ITE-2024-183

## Question
Which one of the following attention -deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) medications is 
considered safest to take while breastfeeding?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Amphetamine (Evekeo)
**B)** Atomoxetine (Strattera)
**C)** Clonidine
**D)** medications is considered safest to take while breastfeeding?
**E)** Methylphenidate (Ritalin)

## Correct Answer
**E**

## Explanation
Racemic methylphenidate has been studied in breastfeeding mothers and drug levels in breast milk were found to be about 0.2% of the adult dose. Drug levels were undetectable in breastfed infants and the infants had no long -term growth or developmental issu es. Methylphenidate can reduce serum prolactin levels, but this has not been shown to have any clinical impact on milk supply. Less is known about amphetamine in breastfeeding, but milk and infant serum levels are significantly higher than with methylpheni date. Atomoxetine and guanfacine have no reliable data in breastfeeding and should be avoided until more is known. Clonidine has been shown to be present in significant amounts in breast milk and serum from breastfed infants (up to 50% of the maternal seru m levels). While no adverse effects have been shown, this high level of medication in the infant raises concerns, and experts recommend avoiding clonidine while breastfeeding.

## References
s Anderson PO. Stimulant therapy during breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med . 2021;16(12):931 -932. Spencer JP, Thomas S, Trondsen Pawlowski RH. Medication safety in breastfeeding. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(6):638 -644.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*