---
id: ITE-2023-003
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 3
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.712812
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2023"]
answer: B
difficulty: Basic
topics: ["Pulmonology", "Gastroenterology", "Neurology", "Orthopedics", "Urology", "Hematology/Oncology", "Infectious Disease"]
---

# Question ITE-2023-003

Which one of the following is an indication for long-term, rather than short-term, proton pump inhibitor therapy?

## Options

**A.** The eradication of Helicobacter pylori

**B.** Gastroprotection in users of high-dose NSAIDs at high risk for gastrointestinal bleeding

**C.** The prevention of rebleeding from a Mallory-Weiss tear

**D.** The prevention of ulcers after band ligation of esophageal varices

**E.** The treatment of an NSAID-related gastric ulcer

## Answer

**B**

## Explanation

Proton pump inhibitors (PPIs) are some of the most commonly used prescription or over-the-counter medications. However, many patients do not have a clear indication for their use, leading to situations in which the risks may outweigh the benefits. In 2022 the American Gastroenterological Association published 10 best practice statements to assist clinicians in addressing this issue. Key recommendations include regular review and documentation of the indication for any ongoing PPI use, and to consider discontinuing PPIs for any patient without a clear indication. Strategies for PPI discontinuation include tapering or abrupt discontinuation. Rebound acid hypersecretion can lead to a temporary increase in symptoms in either approach. If deprescribing is attempted but not tolerated, patients may reasonably be continued on the lowest effective dose. Possible risks, mostly reported in retrospective rather than prospective studies, include an increased incidence of chronic kidney disease, fractures, dementia, and respiratory infections, including COVID-19. 1 While many patients remain on long-term PPI therapy without a clear indication, in some situations the benefits of PPIs do clearly outweigh the risks. Such indications include Barrett esophagus, severe erosive esophagitis, eosinophilic esophagitis, and high risk for upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. Risk factors for GI bleeding include prior ulcer, age >65, high-dose NSAID therapy, or concurrent use of aspirin, corticosteroids, or anticoagulants. Such patients should be advised to use PPIs indefinitely. PPIs are recommended for short-term use for eradication of Helicobacter pylori and treatment of NSAID-induced gastric ulcers. They may also be considered as adjunctive short-term therapy in Mallory-Weiss tears and after sclerotherapy or band ligation treatment of esophageal varices. None of these are indications for long-term use in the absence of other indications.

## References

- Targownik LE, Fisher DA, Saini SD. AGA clinical practice update on de-prescribing of proton pump inhibitors: expert review. Gastroenterology . 2022;162(4):1334-1342.
