---
id: ITE-2024-102
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 102
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.469062
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:32.148231'
---

# Question ITE-2024-102

## Question
A 17 -year-old student athlete is brought to your office for evaluation of a head injury that occurred 
earlier today. The patient was playing soccer when she performed a header and struck the ball with 
her head. She reports a frontal headache and mild nausea. Neurologic examinat ion findings are 
normal.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate management?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A rest period of at least 24 –48 hours
**B)** A brief course of prednisone
**C)** Returning to normal daily activities only when she is symptom -free
**D)** Head CT

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Most guidelines recommend a brief rest period of at least 24 –48 hours following a concussion. No medications are available specifically for concussion. A more conservative approach, including a longer rest period before returning to activity/play, is recom mended for children and adolescents with concussions. Guidelines recommend waiting until the child or adolescent has successfully tolerated return to school before resuming full activity or play. After an initial brief period of rest, individuals with concussions should be encouraged to gradually return to normal daily activities such as school, work, or leisure activities as tolerated. Children do not need to be asymptomatic to return to school. Imaging should be used only to eliminate concerns of more significant injuries and not for evaluation of uncomplicated concussion.

## References
Scorza KA, Cole W. Current concepts in concussion: initial evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2019;99(7):426 -434.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*