---
id: ITE-2024-131
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 131
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.779877
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Endocrinology
related_articles: null
topics:
- Endocrinology
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: practice guidelines transgender gender diverse
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-practice-guidelines-transgender-gender-diverse.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-practice-guidelines-transgender-gender-diverse|practice
    guidelines transgender gender diverse]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/09/2023-09-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.307
  link: '[[2023/09/2023-09-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: gender affirming surgery
  path: 2024/06/2024-06-gender-affirming-surgery.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2024/06/2024-06-gender-affirming-surgery|gender affirming surgery]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:40.398795'
---

# Question ITE-2024-131

## Question
A 42 -year-old female who has undergone a bilateral prophylactic mastectomy and a bilateral 
salpingo -oophorectomy due to a known BRCA  mutation sees you for follow -up. She is experiencing 
symptoms of vasomotor instability and dyspareunia. She asks about hormone replacement therapy.  
 
Which one of the following is the best evidence -based recommendation for this patient?

## Answer Choices
**A)** No hormone therapy
**B)** Estrogen monotherapy until age 50
**C)** Estrogen and progesterone therapy until age 50
**D)** Estrogen and progesterone therapy after age 50

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
Hormone therapy until age 50 has been shown to mitigate some of the health outcomes of early menopause and is the most effective treatment for menopausal symptoms and improved quality of life. Combined hormone replacement therapy with estrogen and progeste rone is indicated for women with a uterus, while estrogen monotherapy is indicated for women without a uterus. Hormone therapy does not seem to have a relevant effect on cancer risk in BRCA mutation carriers.

## References
s Huber D, Seitz S, Kast K, Emons G, Ortmann O. Hormone replacement therapy in BRCA mutation carriers and risk of ovarian, endometrial, and breast cancer: a systematic review. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol . 2021;147(7):2035 -2045. Kingsberg SA, Larkin LC, Liu JH. Clinical effects of early or surgical menopause. Obstet Gynecol . 2020;135(4):853 -868.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*