---
id: ITE-2024-091
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 91
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.377370
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
- title: 'PubMed Entry'
  path: 2022/2022-10-less-than-4-of-children-with-newly-diagnosed-hypertension-in.md
  similarity: 0.2
  link: '[[2022-10-less-than-4-of-children-with-newly-diagnosed-hypertension-in|PubMed Entry]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-091

## Question
A 50 -year-old male sees you for follow -up of hypertension. His only medications are 
hydrochlorothiazide and lisinopril (Zestril). He does not smoke cigarettes or drink alcohol, and he 
does not have any concerns today. Examination findings are unremarkable. A comprehensive 
metabolic panel is normal, but a CBC reveals a plat elet count of 110,000/mm3 (N 150,000– 450,000). 
A repeat platelet count is 115,000/mm3. 
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate initial test?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time
**B)** A peripheral blood smear
**C)** A serum haptoglobin level
**D)** Serum protein electrophoresis
**E)** Bone marrow aspiration

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
This patient has mild thrombocytopenia, defined as a platelet count of 100,000 – 150,000/mm3. Moderate thrombocytopenia is defined as a platelet count of 50,000 – 99,000/mm3 and severe thrombocytopenia as <50,000/mm3. This can be due to splenic sequestration, decreased production, increased destruction, consumption in immune complexes or thrombi, or platelet clumping. The initial test is examination of a peripheral blood smear to look for evidence of clumping, giant platelets, or fragmented RBCs. If the smear is normal except for decreased platelets, then the problem would be drug -induced thrombocytopenia or immune thro mbocytopenic purpura. Obtaining a prothrombin time and partial thromboplastin time is a rapid way to test the integrity of the clotting cascade. A serum haptoglobin level can be used to confirm hemolysis. Serum protein electrophoresis would be utilized if there is suspicion of monoclonal gammopathy. Referral to a hematologist for bone marrow evaluation is recommended for moderate to severe disease.

## References
Gauer RL, Whitaker DJ. Thrombocytopenia: evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(3):288 -298.

## Related AAFP Articles
- [[2022-10-less-than-4-of-children-with-newly-diagnosed-hypertension-in|PubMed Entry]] (Relevance: 20%)

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*