---
id: ITE-2022-067
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 67
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.664429
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2022"]
answer: A
difficulty: Intermediate
topics: ["Orthopedics", "Pediatrics"]
---

# Question ITE-2022-067

Which one of the following disorders is caused by an underlying mechanism of osteochondrosis rather than apophysitis?

## Options

**A.** Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease

**B.** Osgood-Schlatter disease

**C.** Sever’s disease

**D.** Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrome

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Osteochondrosis refers to degenerative changes in the epiphyseal ossification areas of growing bones. Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease is a type of osteochondrosis that affects the femoral head. Patients with Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease should be referred to an orthopedist and instructed to avoid all weight-bearing activities until reossification occurs. Osteochondrosis should be differentiated from apophysitis because the etiologies and management strategies differ. Apophysitis is a traction injury to the cartilage and bony attachments of tendons in growing children. Osgood-Schlatter disease, Sever’s disease, and Sinding-Larsen-Johansson syndrome are apophysitis disorders that affect the anterior tibial tubercle, posterior heel, and inferior patellar pole, respectively. Treatment of apophysitis involves stretching, activity modification, icing, and limited use of NSAIDs.

## References

- Achar S, Yamanaka J: Apophysitis and osteochondritis: Common causes of pain in growing bones. Am Fam Physician 2019;99(10):610-618.
