---
id: ITE-2024-175
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 175
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.225552
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Gastroenterology
related_articles:
topics:
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-175

## Question
A 32 -year-old male has presented to your office 4 times over the past several months because of 
periods of intractable nausea and vomiting lasting 1 –2 days, with up to 14 episodes each day. He has 
also experienced moderate abdominal pain, flushing, sweating, and dry mouth during these episodes. 
On 2 occasions he has required brief admission to the hospital for fluid resuscitation. Promethazine, 
ondansetron, and metoclopramide (Reglan) have been ineffective in treating his symptoms, but hot 
showers provide him relief. His medical history is significant for allergic rhinitis and obesity. His 
social history includes episodes of binge drinking approximately twice monthly and daily marijuana 
use since age 21. He has no history of intravenous drug use or tobacco abuse.  
 Physical findings are significant for a weight loss of 4.5 kg (10 lb) over the past 3 months and 
moderate tenderness to epigastric p alpation. During acute episodes, laboratory evaluations have 
revealed only mild

## Answer Choices
**A)** Abdominal migraines
**B)** Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome
**C)** Carcinoid syndrome
**D)** Pancreatitis
**E)** Peptic ulcer disease

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome (CHS) has become more common with increased legalization and acceptance of cannabis use. While it can be used as an antiemetic, cannabis can also promote vomiting in susceptible individuals who have a significant history of cannabinoid use. Long duration, higher frequency of use, and higher amounts of cannabis use are all risk factors for CHS. Symptomatic relief with hot showers or baths is not found in abdominal migraines, carcinoid syndrome, or peptic ulcer disease. Pancre atitis would cause elevations in lipase levels and some findings on imaging would be expected. Nausea from the other causes is generally relieved with traditional antiemetics. Carcinoid syndrome also causes episodic symptoms such as facial flushing, diarrh ea, hypotension, and tachycardia, but not nausea or vomiting.

## References
s Angus -Leppan H, Saatci D, Sutcliffe A, Guiloff RJ. Abdominal migraine. BMJ. 2018;360:k179. Fashner J, Gitu AC. Diagnosis and treatment of peptic ulcer disease and H. pylori infection. Am Fam Physician . 2015;91(4):236 -242. Ito T, Lee L, Jensen RT. Carcinoid -syndrome: recent advances, current status and controversies. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes . 2018;25(1):22 -35. Perisetti A, Gajendran M, Dasari CS, et al. Cannabis hyperemesis syndrome: an update on the pathophysiology and management. Ann Gastroenterol . 2020;33(6):571 -578. Sorensen CJ, DeSanto K, Borgelt L, Phillips KT, Monte AA. Cannabinoid hyperemesis syndrome: diagnosis, pathophysiology, and treatment -a systematic review. J Med Toxicol . 2017;13(1):71 -87.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*