---
id: ITE-2024-030
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 30
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.837091
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-030

## Question
A 65 -year-old male presents to the emergency department with a large amount of painful 
hematochezia over the last 24 hours. His medical history is significant for chronic, generalized 
osteoarthritis, for which he takes the maximum daily dosage of ibuprofen.  
 The patient is noticeably pale. On examination he has a blood pressure of 80/40 mm Hg and a pulse rate that is 135  beats/min and regular. An abdominal examination is remarkable for diffuse 
tenderness over the umbilical area. Bowel sounds are hyperactive. There is no significant abdominal distention.  
 
Aggressive fluid resuscitation and transfusions are initiated. The g astroenterologist thinks that it is 
unsafe to proceed with endoscopy, given the patient's current medical instability.  
 
Which one of the following would be most appropriate to perform instead of endoscopy?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Radiography of the abdomen
**B)** Ultrasonography of the abdomen
**C)** CT angiography of the abdomen and pelvis
**D)** Technetium Tc 99m –labeled red blood cell scintigraphy
**E)** Laparoscopy

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
Colonoscopy is the gold standard for isolating the source of gastrointestinal bleeding. However, this patient is too unstable to tolerate the risk of colonoscopy. The most appropriate option is CT angiography of the abdomen and pelvis to determine the source of bleeding. Both radiography and ultrasonography of the abdomen would be nonspecific and nondiagnostic. Compared to CT angiography, technetium Tc 99m –labeled red blood cell scintigraphy is less preferred to isolate the source of bleeding. Laparoscopy would be too inva sive and risky in this patient, and would likely not isolate the source of bleeding.

## References
s Hawks MK, Svarverud JE. Acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding: evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2020;101(4):206 -212. Sengupta N, Feuerstein JD, Jairath V, et al. Management of patients with acute lower gastrointestinal bleeding: an updated ACG guideline. Am J Gastroenterol . 2023;118(2):208 -231. Shah AR, Jala V, Arshad H, Bilal M. Evaluation and management of lower gastrointestinal bleeding. Dis Mon . 2018;64(7):321 -332.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*