---
id: ITE-2024-076
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 76
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.238467
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Pediatrics
related_articles:
topics:
- Pediatrics
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-076

## Question
A 32 -year-old female presents with a 1 -week history of constant right upper quadrant pain. She 
underwent a nonemergent outpatient laparoscopic cholecystectomy 3 months ago with an 
unremarkable recovery and has followed her regular diet for more than 2 months. Her medical history 
includes  seasonal allergies, migraine without aura, and 2 uncomplicated deliveries of healthy infants. 
Her medications include a monophasic oral contraceptive, as -needed sumatriptan (Imitrex), and as -
needed loratadine (Claritin). A review of systems is positive for  mild nausea and itching without a 
rash. She has just completed her withdr awal bleed for this contraceptive cycle. Her vital signs are 
normal.  
 
A physical examination reveals mild tenderness to palpation in the right upper quadrant, and scleral 
icterus. The patient had not noticed this tenderness prior to examination. Her skin a ppears faintly 
icteric. Laboratory studies reveal the following:  
CBC   normal   
Urine hCG   negative  

## Answer Choices
**A)** Ascending cholangitis
**B)** Choledocholithiasis of the common bile duct
**C)** Metabolic dysfunction –associated steatohepatitis (nonalcoholic steatohepatitis)
**D)** Oral contraceptives
**E)** Stricture following her surgery

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
This patient has choledocholithiasis with either a retained stone or, more likely, a recurrent stone following cholecystectomy. She has jaundice and her hepatic function tests demonstrate a cholestatic pattern: an AST to ALT ratio <1.5, suggesting an extrahepatic blockage; an elevated alkaline phosphatase level greater than the ALT and AST levels; and an elevated gamma -glutamyl transferase level. Cholangitis would cause a similar elevation but would be accompanied by an increased WBC count. Metabolic dysfunction –associated steatohepatitis (formerly known as nonalcoholic steatohepatitis) and oral contracept ives would be unlikely to cause pain. Stricture is far less likely than a stone.

## References
s Cianci P, Restini E. Management of cholelithiasis with choledocholithiasis: endoscopic and surgical approaches. World J Gastroenterol . 2021;27(28):4536 -4554. Hall P, Cash J. What is the real function of the liver 'function' tests? Ulster Med J . 2012;81(1):30 -36. Ng HJ, Nassar AHM. Reinterventions following laparoscopic cholecystectomy and bile duct exploration. A review of prospective data from 5740 patients. Surg Endosc . 2022;36(5):2809 -2817.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*