---
id: ITE-2023-035
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 35
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.930521
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Peptic Ulcer Disease and H. pylori Infection: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-02-peptic-ulcer-disease-and-h-pylori-infection-common-questions.md
  similarity: 0.474
  link: '[[2023/2023-02-peptic-ulcer-disease-and-h-pylori-infection-common-questions|Peptic
    Ulcer Disease and H. pylori Infection: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Aducanumab Is Not Effective for Mild Cognitive Impairment or Mild Alzheimer
    Dementia and Has Major Safety Issues.
  path: 2022/2022-10-aducanumab-is-not-effective-for-mild-cognitive-impairment-or.md
  similarity: 0.417
  link: '[[2022/2022-10-aducanumab-is-not-effective-for-mild-cognitive-impairment-or|Aducanumab
    Is Not Effective for Mild Cognitive Impairment or Mild Alzheimer Dementia and
    Has Major Safety Issues.]]'
- title: 'Acute Pancreatitis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-07-acute-pancreatitis-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.357
  link: '[[2022/2022-07-acute-pancreatitis-rapid-evidence-review|Acute Pancreatitis:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: Cognitive Enhancers Significantly Improve Mini-Mental State Examination Score
    in Patients With Alzheimer Dementia.
  path: 2024/2024-07-cognitive-enhancers-significantly-improve-mini-mental-state.md
  similarity: 0.357
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-cognitive-enhancers-significantly-improve-mini-mental-state|Cognitive
    Enhancers Significantly Improve Mini-Mental State Examination Score in Patients
    With Alzheimer Dementia.]]'
- title: Acute Medication Poisoning.
  path: 2024/2024-02-acute-medication-poisoning.md
  similarity: 0.348
  link: '[[2024/2024-02-acute-medication-poisoning|Acute Medication Poisoning.]]'
topics:
- Geriatrics
- Neurology
---

# Question ITE-2023-035

The daughter of an 82-year-old bedbound female with Alzheimer dementia requests a home visit to discuss transitions of care due to continued deterioration of her mother’s condition. The daughter has been the caregiver for the past 5 years since her mother began to struggle with independently managing her activities of daily living (ADLs). Recently, the patient’s appetite has significantly diminished, and her daughter is concerned that she has lost 15 lb in the last 6 months. She asks about feeding tube placement, medications to help her appetite, or ways to improve her dementia. The patient no longer recognizes her daughter and is nonverbal but smiles when approached at her bedside upon examination. Her vital signs are stable, she appears cachectic, a physical examination is unremarkable, and pain is not present upon palpation. Which one of the following is recommended at this time? 13 15 ---

## Options

**A.** Assisted oral feeding

**B.** Initiation of a high-calorie supplement

**C.** Initiation of a cholinesterase inhibitor

**D.** Initiation of an appetite stimulant

**E.** Percutaneous feeding tube placement

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

According to the American Geriatrics Society’s Choosing Wisely recommendations, oral handfeeding is no worse for outcomes such as aspiration pneumonia, patient comfort, and death compared to percutaneous feeding tube placement. Agitation and pressure ulcers may worsen with tube feeding. High-calorie shakes or supplements and appetite stimulants are not recommended as they may increase weight but do not improve patient-oriented outcomes such as functional status, quality of life, or survival. Furthermore, appetite stimulants such as megestrol acetate may increase the risk of thrombosis and edema, and hasten death. According to randomized, controlled trials, cholinesterase inhibitors may statistically improve cognitive testing results, but they do not produce meaningful improvement. This patient is approaching end-stage Alzheimer dementia and initiating a cholinesterase inhibitor will not improve functioning and may even worsen appetite, as a common side effect is gastrointestinal disturbance.

## References

American Geriatrics Society. Tip sheet: ten things clinicians and patients should question. ABIM Foundation Choosing Wisely campaign. Updated June 2017 2) Unwin BK, Bedsaul NB, Stubbs S. The physician's role in transitioning older adults into long-term care facilities. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(6):714-717.
