---
id: ITE-2023-100
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 100
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.715175
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2023"]
answer: A
difficulty: Basic
topics: ["Dermatology", "Preventive Medicine"]
---

# Question ITE-2023-100

Your office staff proposes a practice improvement project to create a transgender-friendly clinical environment. Which one of the following interventions would help promote this goal?

## Options

**A.** Ensuring that intake forms and records use gender-neutral or inclusive language

**B.** Offering preventive services based on expressed gender only

**C.** Offering referral to a transgender clinic to all patients

**D.** Polling the staff to see if any of them are transgender

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Many transgender patients report negative experiences with health care providers, which can lead to avoidance of health care interactions. It is important to create a safe and welcoming environment to establish and maintain rapport. Ensuring that intake forms and records use gender-neutral or inclusive language is one way to signal this. Preventive services should be offered based on the patient’s current anatomy, not on expressed gender. Offering a referral to a transgender clinic to all patients is not necessary. Asking staff if they are transgender is invasive and unnecessary, and they may not be willing to disclose this information.

## References

- Klein D, Paradise SL, Goodwin ET. Caring for transgender and gender-diverse persons: what clinicians should know. Am Fam Physician . 2018;98(11):645-653.
