---
id: ITE-2024-024
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 24
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.783760
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-024

## Question
A 64 -year-old male with obesity sees you for follow -up. He started semaglutide (Wegovy) 6 months 
ago and has lost 6% of his starting weight. He has a 1 -month history of worsening dizziness upon 
standing. In addition to semaglutide, his current medications include atorvastatin (Lipitor), 
escitalopram (Lexapro), and lisinopril (Zestril).  
 You note a fine tremor in his hand when he holds up his phone to show you his home blood pressure 
readings. On examination his blood pressure while sitting is 112/64 mm Hg. Three minutes after 
standing, his systolic blood pressure drops by 25 mm Hg and his pulse rate increases by 15 beats/min. 
A CBC is normal and an EKG shows sinus rhythm.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Discontinuing escitalopram
**B)** Discontinuing lisinopril
**C)** Discontinuing semaglutide
**D)** Adding carbidopa/levodopa (Sinemet)
**E)** Adding midodrine

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
A >20 mm Hg decrease in systolic blood pressure 3 minutes after moving from supine to standing indicates orthostatic hypotension, whereas an increase in pulse rate >0.5 bpm/mm Hg is consistent with a nonneurogenic cause. This patient has lost a considerabl e amount of weight and anti -obesity medications are a common etiology of hypotension in this setting. When this occurs, treatments for other comorbidities may need to be adjusted. While midodrine is appropriate to alleviate the symptoms of orthostatic hypo tension if no other causes can be found, discontinuing this patient’s antihypertensive is a more appropriate first step. Escitalopram is not a common cause of orthostatic hypotension. The patient is tolerating semaglutide and losing an appropriate amount o f weight, so discontinuing it is not an appropriate step. GLP -1 receptor agonists can rarely cause a slight increase in heart rate, but not to the degree seen here. This patient’s intention tremor is not consistent with Parkinson disease, and beginning car bidopa/levodopa is not appropriate.

## References
Kim MJ, Farrell J. Orthostatic hypotension: a practical approach. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(1):39 -49.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*