---
id: ITE-2023-136
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 136
created: 2025-08-09 16:23:37.715503
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: E
difficulty: Basic
topics:
- Endocrinology
- Urology
- Preventive Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/06/2024-06-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2024/06/2024-06-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: inside afp article of the year
  path: 2024/09/2024-09-inside-afp-article-of-the-year.md
  similarity: 0.304
  link: '[[2024/09/2024-09-inside-afp-article-of-the-year|inside afp article of the
    year]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:18.742075'
---

# Question ITE-2023-136

Which one of the following is the hallmark of proliferative diabetic retinopathy?

## Options

**A.** Blot hemorrhages

**B.** Cotton-wool spots

**C.** Drusen

**D.** Macular edema

**E.** Neovascularization

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

Diabetic retinopathy is caused by chronic hyperglycemia and is the leading cause of blindness in adults in the United States. Routine screening with a dilated eye examination or retinal imaging performed and interpreted by a skilled clinician shortly after the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus is recommended. Diabetic retinopathy is classified in two stages. Nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy may occur within the first decade following hyperglycemia and is characterized by blot hemorrhages, cotton-wool spots, and retinal vascular microaneurysms. As the number of hemorrhages and microaneurysms increases, normal blood flow is interrupted. Proliferative diabetic retinopathy is the second stage and is characterized by neovascularization, which occurs in response to poor blood flow and retinal ischemia. These new blood vessels are fragile and rupture easily leading to vitreous hemorrhage, fibrosis, and retinal detachment. Drusen are extracellular deposits that accumulate within the macula in macular degeneration, which is unrelated to diabetic retinopathy. Macular edema can occur in both stages of diabetic retinopathy.

## References

- Loscalzo J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine . 21st ed. McGraw Hill; 2022:3120-3128. 53
