---
id: ITE-2024-095
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 95
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.413562
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Infectious Disease
related_articles: null
topics:
- Infectious Disease
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: editorial measles
  path: 2024/08/2024-08-editorial-measles.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2024/08/2024-08-editorial-measles|editorial measles]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:23.987928'
---

# Question ITE-2024-095

## Question
A 65 -year-old patient presents to your office for an annual health maintenance examination. You 
discuss vaccination recommendations, and the patient reports having received the live zoster vaccine 
8 years ago.  
 
Which one of the following should you recommend regarding herpes zoster (shingles) vaccination?

## Answer Choices
**A)** No further vaccination
**B)** No further vaccination if laboratory testing reveals immunity
**C)** One dose of recombinant zoster vaccine (Shingrix)
**D)** Two doses of recombinant zoster vaccine
**E)** Two doses of live varicella vaccine ( Varivax)

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
The CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices recommends recombinant zoster vaccine for the prevention of herpes zoster (shingles) infection for immunocompetent patients age 50 and older. The vaccine is given as a series of 2 doses, administered 2 –6 months apart. For patients who previously received live zoster vaccine, the full 2 -dose series of recombinant vaccine is recommended.

## References
s Dooling KL, Guo A, Patel M, et al. Recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices for use of herpes zoster vaccines. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep. 2018;67(3):103 -108. Greenberg GM, Koshy PA, Hanson MJS. Adult vaccination. Am Fam Physician . 2022;106(5):534 -542.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*