---
id: ITE-2023-070
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 70
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.933592
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: C
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Pleural Effusion: Diagnostic Approach in Adults.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-pleural-effusion-diagnostic-approach-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.361
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-pleural-effusion-diagnostic-approach-in-adults|Pleural Effusion:
    Diagnostic Approach in Adults.]]'
- title: 'Diverticular Disease: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review|Diverticular Disease:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Diagnosis and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-06-chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-diagnosis-and-manageme.md
  similarity: 0.314
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-chronic-obstructive-pulmonary-disease-diagnosis-and-manageme|Chronic
    Obstructive Pulmonary Disease: Diagnosis and Management.]]'
- title: 'Sarcoidosis: Evaluation and Treatment.'
  path: 2024/2024-01-sarcoidosis-evaluation-and-treatment.md
  similarity: 0.314
  link: '[[2024/2024-01-sarcoidosis-evaluation-and-treatment|Sarcoidosis: Evaluation
    and Treatment.]]'
- title: 'Acute Bronchitis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2025/2025-03-acute-bronchitis-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.314
  link: '[[2025/2025-03-acute-bronchitis-rapid-evidence-review|Acute Bronchitis: Rapid
    Evidence Review.]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
- Chest Pain
- Emergency Medicine
- Hematology/Oncology
- Infectious Disease
- Pediatrics
- Pharmacology
- Pulmonology
---

# Question ITE-2023-070

A 72-year-old male presents with a recent history of cough with bloody sputum. For 3 weeks, he produced dark red to brown sputum with his usual morning cough. The last episode was a week ago. He has a chronic, minimally productive cough that he attributes to allergies. He has not had any fever, chest pain, or dyspnea associated with the bloody sputum. He has never smoked and has no known lung disease. His medications include bupropion (Wellbutrin) and fluoxetine (Prozac). His vital signs are unremarkable. An examination including the nasal fossa and oropharynx reveals no evidence of bleeding. A pulmonary examination is normal. A CBC, comprehensive metabolic panel, and INR are also normal. Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step for this patient? 25 27 --- 26 28 ---

## Options

**A.** Reassurance only, with instructions to return if symptoms recur

**B.** Azithromycin (Zithromax)

**C.** A chest radiograph

**D.** CT of the chest with and without contrast

**E.** Referral for bronchoscopy

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

The most common causes of mild hemoptysis in developed countries include COPD, bronchiectasis, acute respiratory infections, and malignancy. Physicians should first rule out pseudohemoptysis (bleeding originating from above the glottis) with a careful examination of the nose and oral cavity. Laboratory studies should be performed to evaluate for anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal function, and hepatic function. The most appropriate next step would be posteroanterior and lateral chest radiographs (SOR C). Chest radiographs can demonstrate pneumonia, abscess, masses, and cavitary lesions. Since they are quick, easily accessible, and provide only a low level of radiation, they are preferred for initial imaging. If the chest radiograph is normal, further evaluation is recommended. The preferred follow-up imaging for nonmassive hemoptysis is CT angiography of the chest with contrast or CT of the chest with contrast, according to the American College of Radiology (ACR) appropriateness criteria (SOR C). The ACR also indicates that CT of the chest with and without contrast is “usually not appropriate.” Deferring further workup unless hemoptysis recurs is not recommended as the underlying cause of bleeding should be identified and treated. The risk of missed diagnoses of potentially fatal conditions makes watchful waiting a poor option. Empiric use of antibiotics is not recommended as the initial step given the lack of infectious symptoms and signs in this patient. Referral for bronchoscopy would be an appropriate step when the initial chest radiographs are normal and the etiology has not been identified. Up to 10% of patients with hemoptysis and a normal chest radiograph have been diagnosed with bronchogenic carcinoma.

## References

Goldman L, Schafer AI (eds): Goldman-Cecil Medicine , ed 26. Elsevier, 2020, pp 504-510.e2. 2) Olsen KM, Manouchehr-Pour S, Donnelly EF, et al; Expert Panel on Thoracic Imaging; ACR Appropriateness Criteria: Hemoptysis. J Am Coll Radiol 2020;17(5S):S148-S159. 3) O'Gurek D, Choi HYJ: Hemoptysis: Evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician 2022;105(2):144-151. 28
