---
id: ITE-2023-176
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 176
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.942656
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: C
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Psychological Interventions for Depression and Anxiety in Patients With Coronary
    Heart Disease or Heart Failure.
  path: 2024/2024-12-psychological-interventions-for-depression-and-anxiety-in-pa.md
  similarity: 0.5
  link: '[[2024/2024-12-psychological-interventions-for-depression-and-anxiety-in-pa|Psychological
    Interventions for Depression and Anxiety in Patients With Coronary Heart Disease
    or Heart Failure.]]'
- title: 'Acute Coronary Syndrome: Diagnosis and Initial Management.'
  path: 2024/2024-01-acute-coronary-syndrome-diagnosis-and-initial-management.md
  similarity: 0.423
  link: '[[2024/2024-01-acute-coronary-syndrome-diagnosis-and-initial-management|Acute
    Coronary Syndrome: Diagnosis and Initial Management.]]'
- title: 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2024/2024-07-obstructive-sleep-apnea-in-adults-common-questions-and-answe.md
  similarity: 0.417
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-obstructive-sleep-apnea-in-adults-common-questions-and-answe|Obstructive
    Sleep Apnea in Adults: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: Health Maintenance in Postmenopausal Women.
  path: 2025/2025-05-health-maintenance-in-postmenopausal-women.md
  similarity: 0.385
  link: '[[2025/2025-05-health-maintenance-in-postmenopausal-women|Health Maintenance
    in Postmenopausal Women.]]'
- title: 'Benzodiazepine Use Disorder: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2023/2023-09-benzodiazepine-use-disorder-common-questions-and-answers.md
  similarity: 0.381
  link: '[[2023/2023-09-benzodiazepine-use-disorder-common-questions-and-answers|Benzodiazepine
    Use Disorder: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
- Emergency Medicine
- Orthopedics
- Palliative Care
- Pharmacology
---

# Question ITE-2023-176

An 80-year-old male with well-controlled hypertension undergoes surgery to repair a hip fracture. He had coronary artery stenting 6 years ago and is asymptomatic. His current medications include lisinopril (Zestril), atorvastatin (Lipitor), and low-dose aspirin. He also takes chronic gabapentin (Neurontin) for postherpetic neuralgia, which is continued postoperatively. Multimodal analgesia is used, including intravenous morphine as needed after surgery. In the postoperative period, this patient would be at greatest risk for which one of the following? 64 66 ---

## Options

**A.** Gabapentin withdrawal symptoms

**B.** Heart failure

**C.** Respiratory depression

**D.** Restless legs syndrome

**E.** Seizure

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

In the postoperative period, this patient would be at greatest risk for respiratory depression. In 2019 the FDA issued a Drug Safety Communication about the risk of serious breathing difficulties that may occur with the use of gabapentin or pregabalin in patients who have respiratory risk factors. The FDA found that respiratory depression can occur when opioids or other medications that depress the central nervous system (CNS) are administered to patients who are taking gabapentinoids or to those with underlying respiratory impairments such as COPD or age-related loss of function. This patient is taking chronic gabapentin, is elderly, and is being prescribed the opioid morphine as needed for postoperative pain. Gabapentinoids, including gabapentin, are being increasingly used for conditions such as seizures, nerve pain, and restless legs syndrome. Misuse is also increasing. They are often combined with other CNS depressants such as opioids, anti-anxiety medications, antidepressants, and antihistamines, thus increasing the risk of respiratory depression. 68  Since gabapentin is continued after surgery in this patient, withdrawal symptoms would not be likely. While the patient should be monitored for heart failure, his cardiac status is stable on the current regimen. This patient would not be at increased risk for restless legs syndrome or seizures due to continued management with gabapentin.

## References

US Food & Drug Administration. FDA warns about serious breathing problems with seizure and nerve pain medicines gabapentin (Neurontin, Gralise, Horizant) and pregabalin (Lyrica, Lyrica CR): when used with CNS depressants or in patients with lung problems. Updated December 19, 2019. 2) Goodman CW, Brett AS. Gabapentinoids for pain: potential unintended consequences. Am Fam Physician . 2019;100(11):672-675. 3) Roth AR, Lazris A, Haskell H, James J. Appropriate use of opioids for chronic pain. Am Fam Physician . 2020;102(6):335-337. 4) Mattson CL, Chowdhury F, Gilson TP. Notes from the field: trends in gabapentin detection and involvement in drug overdose deaths—23 states and the District of Columbia, 2019–2020. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2022;71(19):664-666.
