---
id: ITE-2023-092
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 92
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.935659
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Schizophrenia.
  path: 2022/2022-10-schizophrenia.md
  similarity: 0.471
  link: '[[2022/2022-10-schizophrenia|Schizophrenia.]]'
- title: Pharmacologic Treatment of Depression.
  path: 2023/2023-02-pharmacologic-treatment-of-depression.md
  similarity: 0.467
  link: '[[2023/2023-02-pharmacologic-treatment-of-depression|Pharmacologic Treatment
    of Depression.]]'
- title: 'Postpartum Care Up to One Year After Pregnancy: A Systematic Review and
    Meta-Analysis.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-postpartum-care-up-to-one-year-after-pregnancy-a-systematic.md
  similarity: 0.444
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-postpartum-care-up-to-one-year-after-pregnancy-a-systematic|Postpartum
    Care Up to One Year After Pregnancy: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.]]'
- title: SGLT-2 for Diabetes, Biliary Pain, Depression in Adolescents, Intermittent
    Catheterization, Labor Induction, Umbilical Hernias, Multivitamins.
  path: 2025/2025-02-sglt-2-for-diabetes-biliary-pain-depression-in-adolescents-i.md
  similarity: 0.4
  link: '[[2025/2025-02-sglt-2-for-diabetes-biliary-pain-depression-in-adolescents-i|SGLT-2
    for Diabetes, Biliary Pain, Depression in Adolescents, Intermittent Catheterization,
    Labor Induction, Umbilical Hernias, Multivitamins.]]'
- title: Zuranolone (Zurzuvae) for the Treatment of Postpartum Depression.
  path: 2025/2025-05-zuranolone-zurzuvae-for-the-treatment-of-postpartum-depressi.md
  similarity: 0.375
  link: '[[2025/2025-05-zuranolone-zurzuvae-for-the-treatment-of-postpartum-depressi|Zuranolone
    (Zurzuvae) for the Treatment of Postpartum Depression.]]'
topics:
- Mood Disorder
- Nephrology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2023-092

A 23-year-old graduate student presents to establish care at your office with a 2-week history of symptoms consistent with a major depressive episode. She reports being given a diagnosis of unipolar depression at age 16. For several years, she managed her symptoms effectively with psychotherapy alone. Last year, she was hospitalized for an initial episode of mania with psychotic features and was treated successfully with lithium and risperidone (Risperdal). After returning to her graduate studies 1 month later, she maintained a 9-month period of euthymia on lithium monotherapy before her recent major depressive symptoms began. She does not have any history of recreational drug use. A physical examination, CBC, comprehensive metabolic panel, and TSH level are all normal, and a urine pregnancy test is negative. According to the DSM-5, her mood disorder diagnosis is

## Options

**A.** bipolar I disorder

**B.** bipolar II disorder

**C.** bipolar disorder, not otherwise specified

**D.** cyclothymia

**E.** schizoaffective disorder

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

The primary feature that distinguishes bipolar I disorder from bipolar II disorder is a history of a manic or a mixed manic/depressive episode. Additionally, in bipolar I, there may or may not be a history of psychosis and/or major depression. This patient has a history of a manic episode with psychotic features involving hospitalization, which fulfills the criteria for bipolar I disorder. Her major depressive episodes are consistent with a diagnosis of bipolar I but are not essential to it. Patients with bipolar II disorder, in contrast, have a history of hypomania along with major depression, although no history of mania. Cyclothymia includes hypomanic and depressive symptoms that do not meet bipolar II criteria or a major depressive episode and occur over 2 or more years with no more than 2 symptom-free months during that time. Bipolar disorder, not otherwise specified, defines cases that do not meet full criteria for bipolar I, bipolar II, or cyclothymia, for example, in the setting of manic symptoms lasting less than 1 week, without psychosis or hospitalization. Although overlap exists between bipolar and schizoaffective disorders, for the latter, patients must meet criteria for schizophrenia, which includes a minimum of 2 weeks of euthymic psychosis.

## References

American Psychiatric Association. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed. American Psychiatric Association; 2013:123–154. 2) Marzani G, Price Neff A. Bipolar disorders: evaluation and treatment. Am Fam Physician . 2021;103(4):227-239.
