---
id: ITE-2024-160
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 160
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:42.080558
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.31
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.306
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:40.919547'
---

# Question ITE-2024-160

## Question
A right hand –dominant 9 -year-old male is brought to your office by his parents after falling from a 
piece of playground equipment and landing on his left hand. He is in significant pain and there is 
visible swelling of the distal left forearm. An examinati on reveals intact distal sensation and capillary 
refill. He is given oral NSAIDs. X -rays reveal a unicortical irregularity at the distal radial metaphysis 
without displacement. You diagnose a buckle fracture.  
 
Which one of the following would be most appropriate at this time?

## Answer Choices
**A)** No treatment
**B)** Immobilization in a prefabricated removable splint for 2 –3 weeks
**C)** Immobilization in a short arm cast for 6 weeks
**D)** Immobilization in a long arm cast for 6 weeks
**E)** Referral to an orthopedic surgeon

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
This patient has a buckle fracture, or an incomplete compression fracture. These fractures are common in younger children due to the relative elasticity of their bones. Increasing evidence supports a shorter period of immobilization and follow -up is often not necessary if symptoms are improving. Removable splints are acceptable and may be better tolerated and more convenient in younger patients.

## References
s Kuba MHM, Izuka BH. One brace: one visit: treatment of pediatric distal radius buckle fractures with a removable wrist brace and no follow -up visit. J Pediatr Orthop . 2018;38(6):e338 -e342. Patel DS, Statuta SM, Ahmed N. Common fractures of the radius and ulna. Am Fam Physician . 2021;103(6):345 -354.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*