---
id: ITE-2023-152
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 152
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.940808
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Adult Vaccination.
  path: 2022/2022-11-adult-vaccination.md
  similarity: 0.45
  link: '[[2022/2022-11-adult-vaccination|Adult Vaccination.]]'
- title: 'Mastitis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2024/2024-08-mastitis-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.435
  link: '[[2024/2024-08-mastitis-rapid-evidence-review|Mastitis: Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: Management of Spontaneous Vaginal Delivery.
  path: 2024/2024-06-management-of-spontaneous-vaginal-delivery.md
  similarity: 0.429
  link: '[[2024/2024-06-management-of-spontaneous-vaginal-delivery|Management of Spontaneous
    Vaginal Delivery.]]'
- title: Family Medicine Research Is Not a Federal Priority.
  path: 2023/2023-12-family-medicine-research-is-not-a-federal-priority.md
  similarity: 0.412
  link: '[[2023/2023-12-family-medicine-research-is-not-a-federal-priority|Family
    Medicine Research Is Not a Federal Priority.]]'
- title: 'Dog and Cat Bites: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-dog-and-cat-bites-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.4
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-dog-and-cat-bites-rapid-evidence-review|Dog and Cat Bites:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
topics:
- Blood Pressure
- Cardiology
- Gastroenterology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Pediatrics
---

# Question ITE-2023-152

A 27-year-old gravida 2 para 2 presents because of tenderness in her left lower breast, which she first noticed this morning. Three weeks ago she vaginally delivered an 8 lb 1 oz infant. She breastfed her first child for 10 months and initiated breastfeeding after this delivery without difficulty. Currently she is feeding her infant on cue about every 2–4 hours. On examination she has 4 cm of focal tenderness at 6 o’clock on the breast with no skin erythema. Her vital signs include a temperature of 37.0°C (98.6°F), a pulse rate of 84 beats/min, and a blood pressure of 118/72 mm Hg. Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step? and discarding the breast milk milk

## Options

**A.** A trial of conservative management of breastfeeding on cue and analgesics

**B.** Expressing breast milk by hand every 1½ hours to keep the breast emptied

**C.** Expressing breast milk with a breast pump hourly to keep the breast emptied

**D.** Amoxicillin/clavulanate (Augmentin), 875/125 mg twice daily for 5 days; plus pumping

**E.** Cephalexin, 500 mg four times daily for 7 days; plus pumping and discarding the breast

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

This patient has mild lactational mastitis with no systemic symptoms. Antibiotics are unnecessary and the condition may be managed conservatively with rest, cold compresses, over-the-counter acetaminophen or NSAIDs, and close monitoring for systemic symptoms. The patient should continue on-demand breastfeeding (physiologic feeding). Efforts to keep the breast drained of milk, such as frequent breast pumping or decreased feeding intervals, increase milk production, which may increase breast pain or abscess formation. If the patient develops fever or chills, antibiotics covering Staphylococcus and Streptococcus should be started. The standard treatment is dicloxacillin, 500 mg four times daily for 10–14 days. Other commonly used antibiotics are amoxicillin/clavulanate, 875/125 mg twice daily, or cephalexin, 500 mg four times daily, for 10–14 days. Breast milk does not need to be discarded when the patient is taking these antibiotics.

## References

Louis-Jacques AF, Berwick M, Mitchell KB. Risk factors, symptoms, and treatment of lactational mastitis. JAMA. 2023;329(7):588-589.
