---
id: ITE-2024-066
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 66
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.149977
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-066

## Question
A 60-year-old male who had an ST -elevation myocardial infarction 9 months ago presents for routine 
follow -up. He has been receiving medical therapy and had been attending cardiac rehabilitation at his 
community hospital until recently. He reports gradually increasing dyspnea on exertion but is still 
able to work as a computer programmer and has no problems performing activities of daily living. He 
has developed mild edema. On cardiac examination you note a heart murmur that was not present 3 
months ago. The murmur is holosystolic, grade 3/6, loudest at the cardiac apex, and radiates to the 
axilla.  
 
Which one of the following is the most likely etiology of this murmur?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Aortic stenosis
**B)** Mitral regurgitation
**C)** Mitral stenosis
**D)** Pericardial effusion
**E)** Tricuspid regurgitation

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
In patients who have had a myocardial infarction, chronic mitral regurgitation can develop as a consequence of left ventricular remodeling related to myocardial ischemia. Chronic mitral regurgitation develops gradually and symptoms that are initially mild can progress. In the case of acute chordae tendineae rupture, mitral regurgitation occurs suddenly, and the patient develops acute pulmonary edema and is often hemodynamically unstable. A chronic mitral regurgitation murmur is typically grade 3 –4/6 and holosystolic. It usually obscures S1 and radiates to the axilla, and it is loudest when the patient is supine. An aortic stenosis murmur is a decrescendo murmur, usually grade 2 –3/6, loudest at the aortic area or right upper sternal border, and radiates to the clavicle or neck. A mitral stenosis murmur is a subtle diastolic “rumble” in the left fifth intercostal sp ace, lateral to the nipple, and best heard in the left lateral decubitus position. In a patient with pericardial effusion, heart sounds are generally muffled without a distinct murmur. Isolated tricuspid regurgitation is uncommon and exhibits a high -pitche d softer holosystolic murmur that is best heard at the left lower sternal border and radiates to the right sternal border.

## References
O’Gara PT, Loscalzo J. Approach to the patient with a heart murmur. In: Loscalzo J, Fauci AS, Kasper DL, Hauser SL, Longo DL, Jameson JL, eds. Harrison’s Principles of Internal Medicine . Vol 1. 21st ed. McGraw Hill; 2022:278 -286.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*