---
id: ITE-2024-115
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 115
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.604396
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Gastroenterology
related_articles:
topics:
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-115

## Question
A 4-year-old male with sickle cell disease is brought to the emergency department with left upper 
quadrant abdominal pain. He has a hemoglobin level of 7.0 g/dL, and his usual hemoglobin level is 
10.0 g/dL. A reticulocyte count is elevated above his normal, and his platelet count is 125,000/mm3 
(N 150,000– 400,000).  
 
Which one of the following is the most likely etiology?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Acute chest syndrome
**B)** Acute pain crisis
**C)** Aplastic anemia
**D)** Splenic sequestration
**E)** An upper gastrointestinal bleed

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
The normal hemoglobin level in a patient with sickle cell anemia is 6 –11 g/dL. Acute anemia, defined as a drop of ≥2 g/dL in the hemoglobin level, is not a normal finding in sickle cell crisis. In children, the most likely cause of acute anemia is splenic sequestration. Emergency treatment with RBCs is needed because shock may develop quickly. The typical presentation of this emergent condition includes acute anemia, a low platelet level, and left upper quadrant pain and tenderness. Acute pain crises should generally not have the hemoglobin decrease seen in this patient and transfusions are not routine management. Another prominent cause of acute anemia is an aplastic crisis, which is usually accompanied by a significant decrease in the reticulocyte count. T his would not be a usual presentation of acute chest syndrome, and an upper gastrointestinal bleed would not be a likely cause of this patient’s condition.

## References
Kavanagh PL, Fasipe TA, Wun T. Sickle cell disease: a review. JAMA . 2022;328(1):57 - 68.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*