---
id: ITE-2022-011
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 11
created: 2025-08-09 16:23:37.661731
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2022
answer: E
difficulty: Intermediate
topics:
- Cardiology
- Endocrinology
- Neurology
- Emergency Medicine
- Urology
- Infectious Disease
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:43.130881'
---

# Question ITE-2022-011

Which one of the following is the most common cause of prerenal acute kidney injury in the intensive-care setting?

## Options

**A.** ACE inhibitor use

**B.** NSAID use

**C.** Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis

**D.** Polyarteritis nodosa

**E.** Sepsis

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

Acute kidney injury (AKI) is defined by a rapid decline in glomerular filtration rate (GFR) and an increase in metabolic waste products. It is associated with an increased risk of cardiovascular events, progression to chronic kidney disease, and mortality. AKI is categorized as prerenal, intrinsic renal, and postrenal. Diagnosing the underlying cause is vital to successful management. Management includes determining volume status, treating acute volume changes with diuretics and fluid resuscitation, adjusting medications according to renal function, and discontinuing nephrotoxic medications. Prerenal AKI is caused by a depletion of intravascular volume, which leads to decreased renal perfusion and GFR. In the intensive-care setting, sepsis is the most common cause of prerenal AKI. Angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, and NSAIDs lower renal perfusion, causing the kidneys to activate compensatory mechanisms to maintain the GFR. For those with chronic kidney disease, this increases the risk for AKI. Membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and polyarteritis nodosa are intrinsic renal causes for AKI. Postrenal causes include lower and upper urinary tract disorders such as infections, carcinoma, and nephrolithiasis. Systemic postrenal causes include diabetes mellitus, stroke, and multiple sclerosis.

## References

- Mercado MG, Smith DK, Guard EL: Acute kidney injury: Diagnosis and management. Am Fam Physician 2019;100(11):687-694.
