---
id: ITE-2023-168
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 168
created: 2025-08-09 16:23:37.717647
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
difficulty: Basic
topics:
- Cardiology
- Pulmonology
- Urology
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.414
  link: '[[2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.314
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: ischemic stroke
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-ischemic-stroke.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-ischemic-stroke|ischemic stroke]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/11/2024-11-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.311
  link: '[[2024/11/2024-11-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:32.257467'
---

# Question ITE-2023-168

In patients with severe COPD associated with chronic hypoxemia and hypercapnia, which one of the following has been shown to decrease mortality?

## Options

**A.** Oxygen therapy

**B.** Inhaled fluticasone (Flovent)

**C.** Inhaled formoterol (Perforomist)

**D.** Oral azithromycin (Zithromax)

**E.** Oral prednisone

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Hospice and palliative care should be considered in patients with severe COPD. Oxygen therapy has been shown to reduce mortality in patients with severe hypoxemia and hypercapnia. Additionally, noninvasive ventilation (i.e., CPAP therapy) added to oxygen can also improve mortality. While inhaled therapies such as fluticasone and formoterol can decrease hospitalizations and improve dyspnea, they have not been shown to improve mortality. There is some evidence that inhaled triple therapy with a long-acting muscarinic antagonist, a long-acting -agonist, and an inhaled corticosteroid may improve mortality, but that possibility has not been demonstrated consistently and additional studies are needed. In select patients, lung reduction surgery may also reduce mortality. Azithromycin and oral prednisone are options for adjunctive therapy to reduce exacerbations for some patients, but neither has been shown to decrease mortality in patients with severe COPD associated with chronic hypoxemia and hypercapnia.

## References

- Global Initiative for Chronic Obstructive Lung Disease. 2023 Report: global strategy for the diagnosis, management, and prevention of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Updated 2023.
