---
id: ITE-2023-178
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 178
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.718367
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2023"]
answer: A
difficulty: Basic
topics: ["Neurology", "Psychiatry"]
---

# Question ITE-2023-178

A patient with early-stage Alzheimer disease is brought to your office by his wife to discuss the benefits and risks of possible major surgery. Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step in determining this patient’s decision-making capacity for surgical informed consent?

## Options

**A.** Assessing his ability to understand the risks, benefits, and alternatives

**B.** Reviewing his living will

**C.** Determining his health care surrogate

**D.** Obtaining a competence evaluation

**E.** Obtaining a psychiatric evaluation

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Medical decision-making capacity is defined as a patient’s ability to understand the benefits, risks, and alternatives to a given treatment, or the option of no treatment. Other elements of medical decision-making capacity include the ability to demonstrate appreciation of said benefits, risks, and alternatives; the ability to demonstrate reasoning in making a decision; and the ability to communicate a choice. A living will and surrogate decision maker are considerations when a patient has been determined to lack decision-making capacity. They are not used to determine decision-making capacity. A living will is an advance directive that communicates a patient’s values and treatment preferences when and if they are incapacitated. A surrogate decision maker is an advocate for the patient when it has been determined they do not have decision-making capacity. For example, a surrogate can be someone the patient has appointed in a type of advance directive called a durable power of attorney for health care. If the patient has not appointed someone, then a default person according to state law is specified. 69 Capacity and competence are not the same. Capacity is a medical term about the ability or inability to make decisions about medical treatments and care, whereas competence is a legal term referring to global decision-making about issues such as finances, property, and wills. Capacity is determined by the treating physician and can vary with the circumstances of the decision such as its complexity. While a psychiatric consultation may be helpful in certain circumstances, it is not required.

## References

- Talebreza S, Widera E. Advance directives: navigating conflicts between expressed wishes and best interests. Am Fam Physician . 2015;91(7):480-484. 2) Barstow C, Shahan B, Roberts M. Evaluating medical decision-making capacity in practice. Am Fam Physician . 2018;98(1):40-46.
