---
id: ITE-2024-005
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 5
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.610168
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
- title: 'PubMed Entry'
  path: 2022/2022-12-galactorrhea-milk-discharge.md
  similarity: 0.2
  link: '[[2022-12-galactorrhea-milk-discharge|PubMed Entry]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2024-005

## Question
A 30 -year-old female with a medical history of anxiety and seasonal allergies presents for evaluation 
of palpitations and a racing heartbeat that has worsened over the last 3 –4 days. Recently, her 
escitalopram (Lexapro) dosage was increased to 20 mg daily and she started using fluticasone 
propionate nasal spray (Flonase) a nd oral cetirizine (Zyrtec), 10 mg daily. A CBC, comprehensive 
metabolic panel, and TSH level are normal. A urine pregnancy test is negative. An EKG today shows 
a heart rate of 85 beats/min and a QTc interval of 500 milliseconds.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Reassurance only
**B)** Discontinuing cetirizine
**C)** Discontinuing escitalopram
**D)** Discontinuing fluticasone
**E)** Echocardiography

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
This patient’s EKG shows a prolonged QTc interval (>460 milliseconds for women). QT prolongation can indicate polymorphic ventricular tachycardia characterized by palpitations. QT prolongation can be congenital or acquired. Escitalopram and other antidepre ssants are associated with QT prolongation. Any QT -prolonging medications should be discontinued, and a subsequent EKG should be obtained once the drug levels are expected to be minimal. Reassurance only would not be the most appropriate next step as QT prolongation can lead to torsades de pointes, a potentially fatal arrhythmia (SOR C). Cetirizine and fluticasone are not known to prolong the QT interval. Echocardiography would not be the next step in management.

## References
s Kandiah JW, Blumberger DM, Rabkin SW. The fundamental basis of palpitations: a neurocardiology approach. Curr Cardiol Rev . 2022;18(3):e090921196306. Khatib R, Sabir FRN, Omari C, Pepper C, Tayebjee MH. Managing drug -induced QT prolongation in clinical practice. Postgrad Med J . 2021;97(1149):452 -458. Runser LA, Gauer RL, Houser A. Syncope: evaluation and differential diagnosis. Am Fam Physician . 2017;95(5):303 -312. Wexler RK, Pleister A, Raman SV. Palpitations: evaluation in the primary care setting. Am Fam Physician . 2017;96(12):784 -789.

## Related AAFP Articles
- [[2022-12-galactorrhea-milk-discharge|PubMed Entry]] (Relevance: 20%)

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*