---
id: ITE-2024-111
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 111
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.565357
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.311
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:49.761981'
---

# Question ITE-2024-111

## Question
A 6-year-old female is brought to the urgent care clinic for evaluation of a cough that has persisted 
for more than 2 months. The cough is dry and nonproductive and seems worse when she goes outside 
in the cold weather. She has not had any recent illnesses. She does not have any wheezing or 
shortness of breath. Her vital signs and an examination are normal. A chest x -ray is unremarkable.  
 
Which one of the following next steps in evaluation should be recommended to determine the most 
likely underlying cause?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Reassurance that no further testing is needed at this time
**B)** Polymerase chain reaction testing for pertussis
**C)** Spirometry
**D)** Bronchoscopy
**E)** 24-hour esophageal pH monitoring

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
This patient most likely has cough variant asthma, a common cause of chronic (lasting >8 weeks) cough in children. The minimum appropriate testing for all children with chronic cough is chest x -ray and spirometry. Polymerase chain reaction testing for pertussis is indicated in children who have had a recent upper respiratory tract illness that develops into a classic whooping cough. Bronchoscopy should be considered if there is a history of cough that started and persisted after a choking episode, suggestiv e of foreign body aspiration. GERD is another common cause of chronic cough but can usually be diagnosed by response to an empiric trial of an antacid medication and does not require 24 -hour esophageal pH monitoring.

## References
Michaudet C, Malaty J. Chronic cough: evaluation and management. Am Fam Physician . 2017;96(9):575 -580.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*