---
id: ITE-2023-034
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 34
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.930420
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Evaluation and Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting in Adults.
  path: 2024/2024-05-evaluation-and-treatment-of-nausea-and-vomiting-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.355
  link: '[[2024/2024-05-evaluation-and-treatment-of-nausea-and-vomiting-in-adults|Evaluation
    and Treatment of Nausea and Vomiting in Adults.]]'
- title: 'Syncope: Evaluation and Differential Diagnosis.'
  path: 2023/2023-11-syncope-evaluation-and-differential-diagnosis.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2023/2023-11-syncope-evaluation-and-differential-diagnosis|Syncope: Evaluation
    and Differential Diagnosis.]]'
- title: Common Dermatologic Conditions in Skin of Color.
  path: 2023/2023-01-common-dermatologic-conditions-in-skin-of-color.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2023/2023-01-common-dermatologic-conditions-in-skin-of-color|Common Dermatologic
    Conditions in Skin of Color.]]'
- title: 'Multiple Sclerosis: A Primary Care Perspective.'
  path: 2022/2022-08-multiple-sclerosis-a-primary-care-perspective.md
  similarity: 0.32
  link: '[[2022/2022-08-multiple-sclerosis-a-primary-care-perspective|Multiple Sclerosis:
    A Primary Care Perspective.]]'
- title: The Ill Returning Traveler.
  path: 2023/2023-10-the-ill-returning-traveler.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/2023-10-the-ill-returning-traveler|The Ill Returning Traveler.]]'
topics:
- Cardiology
- Gastroenterology
- Neurology
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2023-034

You are caring for a 21-year-old female with previously diagnosed bipolar II disorder, generalized anxiety disorder, attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder, and insomnia. The patient presents for a same-day appointment with new symptoms of chills, excess sweating, flushing, and nausea of approximately 2 hours’ duration. The patient felt normal upon awakening, took methylphenidate (Ritalin), 5 mg with breakfast, and went to work. She began to feel shaky around lunchtime and took a second dose of methylphenidate, 5 mg. Thirty minutes later she began having agitation, chills, sweating, flushing, and nausea and had to leave work. Her current medications include the following: Desvenlafaxine (Pristiq), 50 mg daily Doxepin, 10 mg daily at bedtime Methylphenidate, 5 mg twice daily Ziprasidone (Geodon), 40 mg twice daily An examination reveals an alert and anxious patient with damp skin, a temperature of 38.1°C (100.6°F), and a heart rate of 110 beats/min. The pupils are slightly dilated and briskly reactive. A neurologic examination reveals a mild tremor and hyperreflexia without clonus. Which one of the following would you recommend for this patient? dextroamphetamine/amphetamine (Adderall)

## Options

**A.** Discontinuing all current medications until her symptoms subside

**B.** Replacing methylphenidate with atomoxetine (Strattera)

**C.** Replacing methylphenidate with amphetamine salts such as

**D.** Symptomatic treatment with diphenhydramine (Benadryl Allergy)

**E.** Symptomatic treatment with ondansetron

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Serotonin syndrome is a serious condition that can be life-threatening. This patient is taking multiple serotonergic medications and displays features suggestive of serotonin syndrome. Signs and symptoms of serotonin syndrome include mental status changes (e.g., agitation, hallucinations, delirium, coma), autonomic instability (e.g., hyperthermia, tachycardia, labile blood pressure, diaphoresis, dizziness, flushing), neuromuscular changes (e.g., tremor, rigidity, hyperreflexia), and gastrointestinal symptoms (e.g., nausea, vomiting, diarrhea). A timely diagnosis and immediate discontinuation of serotonergic medications can help prevent worsening of the condition. Supportive care, sometimes in a hospital or intensive-care setting depending on severity, is the mainstay of treatment. Severe symptoms that necessitate hospital management include a temperature >38.5°C, confusion, delirium, and rigidity. Multiple classes of medications are associated with serotonin syndrome, including SSRIs/SNRIs, tricyclic antidepressants, antipsychotics, stimulants, triptans, and others. Changing to a different stimulant, or to a nonstimulant, would not help resolve serotonin syndrome, nor would symptomatic treatment with diphenhydramine or similar agents. Serotonin syndrome has been reported with 5-HT3 receptor antagonists such as ondansetron, particularly when used in combination with other serotonergic medications.

## References

Foong AL, Grindrod KA, Patel T, Kellar J. Demystifying serotonin syndrome (or serotonin toxicity). Can Fam Physician . 2018;64(10):720-727. 13
