---
id: ITE-2024-031
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 31
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:40.845690
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.312
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.307
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:12.691905'
---

# Question ITE-2024-031

## Question
A patient presents with right -sided facial weakness. You suspect Bell palsy, but an assessment 
suggests a central brain lesion. 
 
A central brain lesion would result in which one of the following findings on the affected side?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Ability to wrinkle the forehead
**B)** Inability to close the eye
**C)** Normal extraocular movements
**D)** Flattening of the nasolabial fold
**E)** Drooping of the mouth

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Patients with Bell palsy present with acute weakness or paralysis of the face caused by dysfunction of peripheral cranial nerve VII (the facial nerve). A central lesion should be suspected if the patient is able to wrinkle the forehead on the affected side during the examination. This is also true if the patient is able to close both eyes tightly. While central nervous system lesions such as multiple sclerosis, stroke, or tumor can also cause facial nerve palsy, some motor neurons to the forehead cross sides at the level of the brain stem, so the fibers in the facial nerve going to the forehead come from both cerebral hemispheres. Therefore, central lesions affecting the facial nerve will not paralyze the forehead on the affected side. This causes unilateral facial paralysis with sparing of the forehead. Expected findings on the affected side in Bell palsy include inability to close the eye, normal extraocular movements, flattening of the nasolabial fold, and drooping of the mouth.

## References
Dalrymple SN, Row JH, Gazewood J. Bell palsy: rapid evidence review. Am Fam Physician . 2023;107(4):415 -420.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*