---
id: ITE-2024-136
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 136
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.831425
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: E
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.309
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:34.271219'
---

# Question ITE-2024-136

## Question
A 52 -year-old male presents with right knee pain after falling from his bicycle earlier today. The 
patient states that he fell to the right when his bicycle tires slid on wet pavement but is uncertain of 
the exact mechanism of injury. He says that he can bear weight on the right leg, but the knee has been 
swollen and tender since the injury.  
 
On examination you observe moderate joint effusion without redness of the knee joint, and a range of 
motion of 80° –180°. There is tenderness to palpation over the patella with no other bony tenderness 
noted. There is no ligamentous laxity. The patient is able to ambulate in the examination room with a 
notable limp.  
 
According to the Ottawa knee rule, this patient is at high risk for fracture and imaging is indicated 
because of which one of the following factors?

## Answer Choices
**A)** His age
**B)** His range of motion
**C)** A limping gait
**D)** Moderate joint effusion
**E)** Tenderness over the patella

## Correct Answer
**E**

## Explanation
The Ottawa knee rule helps to determine if imaging is needed in patients with knee trauma and can decrease unnecessary imaging. The criteria are age ≥55, isolated tenderness of the patella, tenderness at the fibular head, inability to flex the knee to 90°, and inability to bear weight for 4 steps both immediately after the injury and in the office or emergency department. Tenderness over the patella is the most concerning symptom in this patient, and an x - ray is warranted to rule out fracture. Joint effusion is not a criterion of the Ottawa knee rule.

## References
s Bunt CW, Jonas CE, Chang JG. Knee pain in adults and adolescents: the initial evaluation. Am Fam Physician . 2018;98(9):576 -585. Hwang C. Calculated decisions: Ottawa knee rule. Emerg Med Pract . 2020;22(suppl 8):CD11 -CD12.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*