---
id: ITE-2024-139
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 139
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.861410
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: E
topic: Pediatrics
related_articles: null
topics:
- Pediatrics
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.407
  link: '[[2024/10/2024-10-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.405
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.405
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.31
  link: '[[2024/08/2024-08-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
- title: practice guidelines headache pregnancy ureastfeeding
  path: 2023/07/2023-07-practice-guidelines-headache-pregnancy-breastfeeding.md
  similarity: 0.309
  link: '[[2023/07/2023-07-practice-guidelines-headache-pregnancy-breastfeeding|practice
    guidelines headache pregnancy ureastfeeding]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:26.850291'
---

# Question ITE-2024-139

## Question
A 45 -year-old female sees you for a refill of her asthma medication. She takes 1 puff of her albuterol 
inhaler (Proventil, Ventolin) daily prior to exercising. She wakes up at night a couple of times per 
week with dyspnea, which is relieved with another puff from her albuterol inhaler. Her most recent  
asthma exacerbation requiring oral corticosteroids was 4 months ago. She has not been hospitalized 
for an asthma exacerbation since she was a child.  
 
Which one of the following should be prescribed for this patient to reduce severe asthma 
exacerbations?

## Answer Choices
**A)** An interleukin -5 antagonist
**B)** A leukotriene receptor antagonist
**C)** A long -acting β-agonist (LAB
**D)** A long -acting muscarinic antagonist
**E)** An inhaled corticosteroid/LABA combination

## Correct Answer
**E**

## Explanation
This patient has moderate persistent asthma, based on the history of symptoms that occur daily and more than once per week at night. Single maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) with an inhaled corticosteroid and long -acting β-agonist (LABA) is recommen ded for management of moderate asthma in adults and adolescents (SOR A). LABAs have a boxed warning against monotherapy due to an increase in death related to asthma secondary to the risk for paradoxical bronchospasm. Long -acting muscarinic antagonists may also cause paradoxical bronchospasm and are not recommended for first-line therapy in asthma. Interleukin -5 antagonists may be considered in severe asthma as add -on maintenance but not as a reliever treatment. Leukotriene receptor antagonists are consider ed second -line controller therapy and not considered for reliever treatment.

## References
Raymond TJ, Peterson TA, Coulter J. Chronic asthma treatment: common questions and answers. Am Fam Physician . 2023;107(4):358 -368.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*