---
id: ITE-2024-194
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 194
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:42.395625
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.309
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.306
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.305
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:26:32.921257'
---

# Question ITE-2024-194

## Question
Most elder abuse is perpetrated by

## Answer Choices
**A)** family members
**B)** friends
**C)** nurses
**D)** paid caregivers
**E)** physicians

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Most elder abuse occurs in the home and is perpetrated by family members (90% of all cases). A small proportion of older adults live in nursing homes, with only 4% of abuse perpetrated by paid caregivers. Risk factors for elder abuse include shared living arrangements, increased age, decreased physical health, cognitive impairment, disruptive behaviors, alcohol misuse, and social isolation. Caregiver characteristics associated with abuse include mental illness, substance abuse, and dependence on the victim (often financially). There are validated screening instruments available, notably the Elder Abuse Suspicion Index, but the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has found insufficient evidence for screening older adults for abuse and neglect when there are no recognized signs an d symptoms of abuse. Identification of elder abuse is a professional responsibility of family physicians. However, physicians report a very small number of elder abuse cases (1.4%). Family members, social service workers, friends, and law enforcement most commonly report abuse. Most states mandate reporting of elder abuse but there is a dearth of training for physicians in recognizing elder abuse. Signs are often subtle and physical findings are not always evident.

## References
s Hoover RM, Polson M. Detecting elder abuse and neglect: assessment and intervention. Am Fam Physician . 2014;89(6):453 -460. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: intimate partner violence, elder abuse, and abuse of vulnerable adults: screening. October 23, 2018.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*