---
id: ITE-2024-128
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 128
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.741460
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-128

## Question
A 69 -year-old male with a history of coronary artery disease sees you for follow -up after 
hospitalization for new -onset atrial fibrillation. After some difficulty with low blood pressure with 
other rate control agents, he was discharged on amiodarone.  
 
This patient should be monitored for amiodarone toxicity with which one of the followin g?

## Answer Choices
**A)** An amiodarone plasma level
**B)** A blood glucose level
**C)** A CBC with differential
**D)** Pulmonary function testing
**E)** Urinalysis

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
Patients treated with amiodarone should be monitored with pulmonary function testing at baseline and if clinical suspicion of pulmonary toxicity develops. Amiodarone is commonly used to manage ventricular arrhythmias, and for rate and rhythm control in atrial fibrillation. Amiodarone is associated with pulmonary fibrosis, and baseline assessment with pulmonary function tests including measurement of diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide (DLCO) and chest x -ray is recommended. Amiodarone is also associated with hypothyroidism and less commonly with hyperthyroidism, liver inflammation, peripheral neuropathies, optic neuritis and corneal microdeposits, and bluish skin discoloration. Amiodarone plasma levels, blood glucose monitoring, a CBC with dif ferential, and urinalysis are not routinely indicated in patients taking amiodarone.

## References
Siddoway LA. Amiodarone: guidelines for use and monitoring. Am Fam Physician . 2003;68(11):2189 -2196.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*