---
id: ITE-2023-098
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 98
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.936156
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Tonsillitis and Tonsilloliths: Diagnosis and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-01-tonsillitis-and-tonsilloliths-diagnosis-and-management.md
  similarity: 0.458
  link: '[[2023/2023-01-tonsillitis-and-tonsilloliths-diagnosis-and-management|Tonsillitis
    and Tonsilloliths: Diagnosis and Management.]]'
- title: 'Streptococcal Pharyngitis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2024/2024-04-streptococcal-pharyngitis-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.44
  link: '[[2024/2024-04-streptococcal-pharyngitis-rapid-evidence-review|Streptococcal
    Pharyngitis: Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Infertility: Evaluation and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-06-infertility-evaluation-and-management.md
  similarity: 0.417
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-infertility-evaluation-and-management|Infertility: Evaluation
    and Management.]]'
- title: 'Infectious Mononucleosis: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2023/2023-01-infectious-mononucleosis-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2023/2023-01-infectious-mononucleosis-rapid-evidence-review|Infectious
    Mononucleosis: Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
- title: 'Diverticular Disease: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.333
  link: '[[2022/2022-08-diverticular-disease-rapid-evidence-review|Diverticular Disease:
    Rapid Evidence Review.]]'
topics:
- Blood Pressure
- Cardiology
- ENT
- Endocrinology
- Infectious Disease
- Neck Pain
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Orthopedics
- Pediatrics
- Sore Throat
---

# Question ITE-2023-098

A 45-year-old female presents with a 1-week history of pain at the base of her anterior neck radiating to her right jaw. Prior to the onset of pain she had a sore throat, fever, and body aches. These symptoms resolved and the neck pain started. She now reports palpitations and excessive sweating. Her vital signs include a pulse rate of 110 beats/min, a blood pressure of 140/83 mm Hg, and a normal temperature. On examination she appears uncomfortable and diaphoretic. An HEENT examination is unremarkable and you note no cervical lymphadenopathy. Her thyroid is tender and mildly enlarged. A cardiac examination shows tachycardia with no murmurs. Laboratory studies reveal a normal CBC, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 55 mm/hr (N 0–29), and a TSH level of 0.21 U/mL (N 0.5–5.0). Total T3 and free T4 levels are within the normal range. You order a radioactive iodine uptake scan, which shows diffusely low iodine uptake in her thyroid. In addition to a -blocker, which one of the following would be most appropriate at this point?

## Options

**A.** Ibuprofen, 800 mg three times daily

**B.** Levothyroxine (Synthroid), 50 g daily

**C.** Methimazole, 5 mg three times daily

**D.** Prednisone, 40 mg daily

**E.** Vancomycin, 20 mg/kg intravenously every 12 hours

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

This patient has signs and symptoms consistent with subacute thyroiditis, which is confirmed by laboratory testing (an elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate, a low TSH level, and normal T3 and T4 levels) and a radioactive iodine uptake scan with diffusely low iodine uptake. Subacute thyroiditis often follows a viral infection and is most common in women in their fifties, with peak occurrence in the late summer and fall months. The goal of treatment is to reduce thyroid pain and treat symptoms of thyrotoxicosis. High-dose NSAIDs or acetylsalicylic acid are first-line recommendations (SOR C). This patient would also benefit from the use of a -blocker to ameliorate her tachycardia and diaphoresis. During the acute thyroiditis phase, thyroid hormone supplementation is not indicated and will likely worsen symptoms. Levothyroxine would be indicated once the acute thyrotoxic phase resolves and there is evidence of hypothyroidism. Since subacute thyroiditis is a self-limited condition, levothyroxine is recommended for 12 months. Antithyroid medications such as methimazole are not indicated in subacute thyroiditis, which is a destructive process itself. While glucocorticoids such as prednisone provide faster pain relief than first-line NSAIDs or aspirin, they should not be used unless first-line treatments have failed to resolve symptoms in 4 days. Antibiotics are prescribed in suppurative thyroiditis, which is characterized by fever, leukocytosis, and cervical lymphadenopathy in addition to thyroid pain. They should be started empirically after negative blood cultures have been obtained.

## References

Sencar ME, Calapkulu M, Sakiz D, et al. An evaluation of the results of the steroid and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug treatments in subacute thyroiditis in relation to persistent hypothyroidism and recurrence. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):16899. 2) Quintero BM, Yazbeck C, Sweeney LB. Thyroiditis: evaluation and treatment. Am Fam Physician . 2021;104(6):609-617. 39
