---
id: ITE-2024-110
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 110
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.555263
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: C
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-110

## Question
A 30 -year-old female with no past medical history presents for a routine health maintenance 
examination. Although she currently has a sedentary lifestyle, she is motivated to begin an exercise program to improve her health and reduce her risk for cardiovascular disease. She asks for specific 
examples of e xercise plans that would be most likely to provide this benefit.  
 According to guidelines from the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association, 5 days per week of which one of the following would be the most appropriate recommendation for thi s 
patient?

## Answer Choices
**A)** 10 minutes of running
**B)** 20 minutes of brisk walking
**C)** 30 minutes of water aerobics
**D)** 40 minutes of stretching
**E)** 50 minutes of casual walking

## Correct Answer
**C**

## Explanation
The American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association (ACC/AHA) recommends that adults engage in a minimum of 150 minutes of moderate -intensity or 75 minutes of vigorous -intensity aerobic physical activity per week, or an equivalent combination of moderate -intensity and vigorous -intensity aerobic activity, to reduce the risk for cardiovascular disease. Examples of moderate -intensity aerobic physical activity include brisk walking, ballroom dancing, active yoga, water aerobics, cycling on level groun d, and doubles tennis. Examples of vigorous -intensity activities include jogging or running, swimming laps, cycling vigorously or on uneven ground, and playing singles tennis or basketball. Of the examples given in this scenario, only 30 minutes of water aerobics (a moderate - intensity activity) 5 days per week meets the minimum recommended level of aerobic exercise. Casual walking, a light -intensity aerobic activity, is more favorable than sedentary behavior for reducing cardiovascular risk, but light -intensity activities do not contribute toward reducing cardiovascular disease risk as effectively as moderate - and vigorous -intensity activities, according to ACC/AHA guidelines.

## References
Arnett DK, Blumenthal RS, Albert MA, et al. 2019 ACC/AHA guideline on the primary prevention of cardiovascular disease: a report of the American College of Cardiology/American Heart Association Task Force on Clinical Practice Guidelines. Circulation . 2019;140(11):e596 -e646. Physical activity guidelines for Americans. 2nd ed. US Department of Health and Human Services. 2018.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*