---
id: ITE-2024-182
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 182
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:42.289264
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Cardiology
related_articles:
topics:
- Cardiology
---

# Question ITE-2024-182

## Question
You see a 50 -year-old female for a  health maintenance examination. She is the primary caregiver for 
her father who has dementia, and she has heard that Alzheimer disease is genetic and asks if there is anything she can do to reduce her risk. She is in perimenopause and experiences severe h ot flashes. 
She recently started a kickboxing class and drinks 1 –
2 beers per week. On examination her vital signs 
include a blood pressure of 138/80 mm Hg, a pulse rate of 63 beats/min, and a BMI of 30 kg/m2. 
 
Which one of the following should you recommen d to decrease this patient’s risk for dementia?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A memory training app on her smartphone
**B)** Abstaining from alcohol
**C)** Testing for biomarkers associated with Alzheimer disease
**D)** A target systolic blood pressure ≤130 mm Hg
**E)** Hormone therapy with estrogen and progesterone

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
Maintaining a systolic blood pressure ≤130 mm Hg in midlife has been shown to reduce the risk for developing dementia. While reading, playing music, and speaking a foreign language have demonstrated benefits in maintaining cognition, there is no good -quality evidence to show that computer -based memory training games prevent cognitive decline. Extremes of alcohol use (both long -term abstinence and abuse) are associated with an increased risk for dementia. Most people who are positive for biomarkers associated with Alzheimer disease will not go on to develop the disease. Additionally, there is no evidence that presymptomatic identi fication of Alzheimer disease is beneficial. Hormone therapy with estrogen and progesterone is an effective treatment for vasomotor symptoms of menopause but is associated with an increased risk for dementia when administered in women ≥65 years of age . For women in their 40s and 50s, hormone therapy with estrogen only has demonstrated a significant decrease in dementia, while estrogen plus progesterone therapy has demonstrated a nonsignificant decrease.

## References
s Gartlehner G, Patel SV, Reddy S, Rains C, Schwimmer M, Kahwati L. Hormone therapy for the primary prevention of chronic conditions in postmenopausal persons: updated evidence report and systematic review for the US Preventive Services Task Force. JAMA . 2022;328(17):1747 -1765. Gates NJ, Vernooij RW, Di Nisio M, et al. Computerised cognitive training for preventing dementia in people with mild cognitive impairment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev . 2019;3(3):CD012279. Livingston G, Huntley J, Sommerlad A, et al. Dementia prevention, intervention, and care: 2020 report of the Lancet Commission. Lancet . 2020;396(10248):413 -446. Nerattini M, Jett S, Andy C, et al. Systematic review and meta -analysis of the effects of menopause hormone therapy on risk of Alzheimer’s disease and dementia. Front Aging Neurosci. 2023;15:1260427.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*