---
id: ITE-2023-144
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 144
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.716412
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2023"]
answer: C
difficulty: Basic
topics: ["Dermatology", "Hematology/Oncology"]
---

# Question ITE-2023-144

You are preparing to inform a patient of a diagnosis of terminal metastatic cancer. When sharing bad news with a patient, which one of the following is the most appropriate next step?

## Options

**A.** Selecting which information to share with the patient

**B.** Asking the family what the patient knows

**C.** Obtaining the patient’s permission to discuss the diagnosis

**D.** Explaining palliative care

**E.** Informing the patient about hospice

## Answer

**C**

## Explanation

As health care has moved to a patient-centered, decision-making model, there is a focus on communication skills and patient preferences. These apply when physicians share serious or bad news with patients. The Setting, Perception, Invitation, Knowledge, Emotions, and Strategy/Summary (SPIKES) protocol can be used for sharing bad news. It is during the invitation step of SPIKES that a physician determines how much information or detail a patient desires to hear. Patient preferences vary and are influenced by demographics including age, sex, education, and culture (SOR B). While most patients want to know their diagnosis, the amount of detail varies. It is important to recognize this before sharing serious or bad news. Asking permission to discuss the information enables the patient to control the conversation. The following questions are examples of how to ask for patient permission: Would it be okay if I give you those test results now? Are you someone who likes to know all of the details, or would you prefer that I focus on the most important results? If the patient declines, then offer to review the diagnosis again when they are ready or when a family member is present. Previously in the paternalistic patient care model, the physician would select the information to share to help steer the patient toward the best decision. While the family is important, SPIKES is directed toward the patient because it is the patient, not the family, who controls the amount of detail that is discussed. The last S in SPIKES is for Strategy and Summary. While palliative care and hospice could be included in that discussion, it would vary based upon what the patient wants to discuss at the time the bad news is initially shared.

## References

- Berkey FJ, Wiedemer JP, Vithalani ND. Delivering bad or life-altering news. Am Fam Physician . 2018;98(2):99-104.
