---
id: ITE-2024-032
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 32
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.854404
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Endocrinology
related_articles:
topics:
- Endocrinology
---

# Question ITE-2024-032

## Question
A 54 -year-old female with Hashimoto thyroiditis sees you for follow -up. She does not report any 
clinical symptoms, but her TSH level is <0.1 μ U/mL (N 0.5 –5.0) and her free T 4 level is elevated at 
1.9 ng/dL (N 0.6 –1.6). Her only medication is levothyroxine (Synthroid), and she reports taking more 
than the prescribed dosage to help with weight loss. You tell her that this may have several dangerous 
outcomes.  
 
Which one of the following adverse reactions is the most likely to occur with misuse of this 
medicati on?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Atrial fibrillation
**B)** Exophthalmos
**C)** Goiter
**D)** Seizure
**E)** Tetany

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Thyrotoxicosis secondary to the overuse of thyroid hormone, as with other causes of hyperthyroidism, has significant adverse effects, including weight loss, diarrhea, and loose stools and more concerning adverse effects including osteoporosis, atrial fibrillation, and, more rarely, high -output heart failure related to the thyroid hormone receptors in bone and heart tissue. Atrial fibrillation may be present in 10% –25% of patients with thyrotoxicosis. Even subclinical hyperthyroidism has been associated with a significantly higher risk for atrial fibrillation. Exophthalmos and goiter do not occur because they are not caused by the thyroid hormone itself. Seizure and tetany are not known effects of thyrotoxicosis.

## References
s Biondi B, Cooper DS. Subclinical hyperthyroidism. N Engl J Med . 2018;378(25):2411 - 2419. Lee SY, Pearce EN. Hyperthyroidism: a review. JAMA . 2023;330(15):1472 -1483.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*