---
id: ITE-2024-067
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 67
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.158741
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Infectious Disease
related_articles:
topics:
- Infectious Disease
- Gastroenterology
---

# Question ITE-2024-067

## Question
A 32 -year-old male is hospitalized with a 1 -week history of an acute illness. His signs and symptoms 
include a fever of 38.9 °C (102.0 °F), axillary and inguinal lymphadenopathy, sore throat, arthralgias, 
myalgias, headache, and a skin rash. He has a histo ry of intravenous drug use, but says his last use 
was 2 weeks ago. He does not have a history of travel outside the United States, tick bites, or 
occupational exposure.  
 
On examination you note pharyngeal edema and erythema without tonsillar enlargement. S hallow, 
sharply demarcated ulcers are noted on the oral mucosa. He has a generalized rash that began 3 days 
after the onset of fever and has the appearance of pityriasis rosea. Nontender nodes are noted in the axillae and groin.  
 Laboratory studies reveal mild anemia, thrombocytopenia, and a slight elevation of liver enzymes. His WBC count is 3000/mm
3 (N 4300 –10,800). A rapid plasma reagin test, office testing for 
mononucleosis, rapid antibody HIV testing, blood cul

## Answer Choices
**A)** Herpes simplex virus IgM testing
**B)** An HIV viral load
**C)** A Western blot for HIV
**D)** Prednisone
**E)** A skin lesion biopsy

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
Diagnosing acute HIV infection has substantial implications for both the individual and for public health, as the infection will be easy to spread during this time. In a person who has a sudden onset of an ill -defined mononucleosis -like syndrome and/or ase ptic meningitis, acute HIV infection should be in the differential diagnosis along with mononucleosis, cytomegalovirus, toxoplasmosis, rubella, viral hepatitis, disseminated gonococcal infection, and other viral illnesses. Mucocutaneous ulcer is unusual in most of these conditions and should arouse suspicion. Skin rash is uncommon in mononucleosis, visceral larva migrans, and toxoplasmosis, and tends to spare the palms and soles in rubella. The abrupt onset of symptoms, phar yngeal edema without tonsillar enlargement or exudates, and diarrhea all help to distinguish acute HIV from mononucleosis. A positive heterophile antibody test can occur in acute HIV infection, and atypical lymphocytes can be seen in both. Negative results of the rapid enzyme -linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or Western blot test early in the course of illness can be misleading, as the antibody response is not detected until 3 –7 weeks after infection. Newer fourth -generation tests further reduce this perio d of false -negative serologic tests to 2−4 weeks. However, individuals such as this with acute HIV infection have a markedly elevated viral load easily detected by regular viral tests. The utility of serologic testing such as IgM for infection with herpes simplex virus is limited due to low specificity and high false -positive rates. It would be inappropriate or harmful to initiate prednisone in the setting of an undiagnosed infection, wi th rare exceptions such as stress -dose corticosteroids for critical illness. While a skin biopsy may provide information to the clinician to prompt consideration of acute HIV in the differential diagnosis, it would be more expedient to establish the diagno sis and initiate treatment without subjecti

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*