---
id: ITE-2024-014
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 14
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:40.688426
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Psychiatry
related_articles:
topics:
- Psychiatry
---

# Question ITE-2024-014

## Question
A 32 -year-old female comes to your office with her husband after a recent weeklong episode of 
elevated mood and energy that meets the diagnostic criteria for a manic episode. They both say that 
she has never had any episodes of depression, low mood, or anhedonia.  
This patient’s presentation is most consistent with which one of the following disorders?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Bipolar I
**B)** Bipolar II
**C)** Borderline personality
**D)** Cyclothymic
**E)** Disruptive mood dysregulation

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Bipolar I disorder does not require a history of a major depressive episode and may be diagnosed and treated based on just 1 manic episode. The diagnosis of bipolar II disorder requires at least 1 hypomanic and 1 major depressive episode. Borderline person ality disorder may coexist with bipolar I disorder but the diagnosis is based on the presence of unstable personal relationships and severe impulsivity. Cyclothymic disorder presents with a history of both hypomanic and depressive symptoms that do not meet the full criteria for hypomanic or major depressive episodes. Disruptive mood dysregulation disorder is a condition diagnosed between the ages of 6 and 18, characterized by severe recurrent outbursts of temper.

## References
American Psychiatric Association. Bipolar and related disorders. In: Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders . 5th ed, text revision. American Psychiatric Association; 2022:123 -154.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*