---
id: ITE-2024-055
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 55
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.050387
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: E
topic: Pediatrics
related_articles:
topics:
- Pediatrics
---

# Question ITE-2024-055

## Question
A 6-month -old male is brought to your office by his parents for a well baby  examination. This is the 
patient’s first visit to your office as his family recently immigrated to the United States. The infant 
appears to be developing normally, but the parents are concerned because they have not observed a 
right testicle.  
 
On examinat ion you are able to palpate the left testicle in the normal location. The right testicle is not 
located in the scrotum but is palpable along the inguinal canal. It can be moved into the upper 
scrotum but requires constant tension to remain in this position  and immediately retracts after release.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step in management?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Reassurance that the condition will resolve spontaneously
**B)** Follow -up in 2 months
**C)** An ultrasound of the scrotum and pelvis
**D)** Referral to an endocrinologist
**E)** Referral to a urologist

## Correct Answer
**E**

## Explanation
Cryptorchidism is the most common genitourinary malformation in male children, and primary care physicians play a key role in the early identification of this condition. The next step in management would be referral to a urologist (SOR C). Reassuring the parents that the patient’s condition will spontaneously resolve is not sufficient. If the testicle were located in the upper scrotum or lower inguinal canal, then an annual examination to ensure spontaneous resolution would be acceptable. If the patient had bilateral undescended testicles that were nonpalpable, then referral to an endocrinologist would be the most appropriate next step. Imaging is not recommended before consultation with a surgical specialist (SOR C). After surgery, patients need lifelong su rveillance and counseling regarding fertility implications and increased risk for testicular conditions.

## References
Nguyen V, Ngo L, Jaqua EE. Cryptorchidism (undescended testicle). Am Fam Physician . 2023;108(4):378 -385.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*