---
id: ITE-2024-148
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 148
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.954871
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: A
topic: Pediatrics
related_articles: null
topics:
- Pediatrics
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: prenatal care
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-prenatal-care.md
  similarity: 0.404
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-prenatal-care|prenatal care]]'
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2024/06/2024-06-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2024/06/2024-06-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:17.481830'
---

# Question ITE-2024-148

## Question
A 3-year-old male with a peanut allergy is brought to your office by his parents for a well child visit. 
His parents ask if there is anything they can do to prevent a peanut allergy if they have more children 
in the future.  
 
Which one of the following would be the most appropriate recommendation to decrease the risk for 
food allergies in children?

## Answer Choices
**A)** Early sequential exposure to allergenic food between 4 and 6 months of life
**B)** Exclusive breastfeeding for the first 3 –4 months of life
**C)** Regular antibiotics in the first 2 years of life
**D)** Restricted cow's milk supplementation during the first 3 months of life
**E)** A restricted maternal diet during pregnancy and breastfeeding

## Correct Answer
**A**

## Explanation
Food allergies affect 8% of children and about 40% of these food allergies are reported as severe, causing anxiety for parents and caregivers. Peanuts, shellfish, cow's milk, tree nuts, and eggs are the most common allergenic foods, and peanuts are the most common food that causes life-threatening anaphylaxis. Risk factors include atopic dermatitis; allergic rhinitis; asthma; and allergies to latex, medications, and insect venoms. A family history of atopy as well as vitamin D insufficiency and antibiotic use in the first 2 years o f life also increase the risk for developing food allergies. The primary treatment of food allergies is eliminating the offending foods. Preventive measures shown to decrease the risk for developing food allergies include sequential exposure to allergenic foods starting between 4 and 6 months of life and restricting exposure to cow's milk in the first 3 days of life. Exclusive breastfeeding for 3 –4 months reduces the likelihood of developing asthma and eczema, but it does not reduce the risk for food allergies. There is no supporting evidence that restricting the mot her's diet during pregnancy and lactation reduces the risk for food allergies in children. Referenc e Bright DM, Stegall HL, Slawson DC. Food allergies: diagnosis, treatment, and prevention. Am Fam Physician . 2023;108(2):159 -165.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*