---
id: ITE-2024-088
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 88
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:41.349820
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.307
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.306
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:25.451535'
---

# Question ITE-2024-088

## Question
A patient is considering hormonal contraception, and you counsel her regarding the potential for 
abnormal uterine bleeding. Which one of the following contraceptives is most associated with abnormal uterine bleeding that is less likely to improve with time ?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A combined oral contraceptive with continuous dosing
**B)** A combined oral contraceptive with cyclic dosing
**C)** Medroxyprogesterone acetate (Depo -Provera CI)
**D)** An etonogestrel implant (Nexplanon)
**E)** A levonorgestrel IUD (Mirena)

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
Abnormal uterine bleeding is a common issue for patients taking hormonal contraception, and family physicians should engage in shared decision -making with patients regarding its potential duration. Frequent or prolonged bleeding can occur in up to 23% of patients using the etonogestrel implant, and this bleeding is less likely to improve over time. Patients on either continuous or cyclic combined oral contraceptives can be counseled to expect bleedin g abnormalities during the first 3 months. The estrogen component helps with cycle control because it stabilizes the endometrium. Patients tend to have amenorrhea and lighter menses after 6 –12 months of medroxyprogesterone acetate use (SOR B). While up to 35% of patients with the levonorgestrel IUD experience frequent or prolonged bleeding in the first 3 months of use, most have a reduction in uterine bleeding within 12 months (SOR B).

## References
Schrager S, Fox K, Lee R. Abnormal uterine bleeding associated with hormonal contraception. Am Fam Physician . 2024;109(2):161 -166.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*