---
id: ITE-2023-187
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 187
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.943473
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: E
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Acute Shoulder Injuries in Adults.
  path: 2023/2023-05-acute-shoulder-injuries-in-adults.md
  similarity: 0.625
  link: '[[2023/2023-05-acute-shoulder-injuries-in-adults|Acute Shoulder Injuries
    in Adults.]]'
- title: 'Osteoarthritis of the Hip and Knee: Can Antidepressants Help?'
  path: 2023/2023-06-osteoarthritis-of-the-hip-and-knee-can-antidepressants-help.md
  similarity: 0.625
  link: '[[2023/2023-06-osteoarthritis-of-the-hip-and-knee-can-antidepressants-help|Osteoarthritis
    of the Hip and Knee: Can Antidepressants Help?]]'
- title: 'Firearm Injury Prevention: Practical Office Tips.'
  path: 2024/2024-05-firearm-injury-prevention-practical-office-tips.md
  similarity: 0.625
  link: '[[2024/2024-05-firearm-injury-prevention-practical-office-tips|Firearm Injury
    Prevention: Practical Office Tips.]]'
- title: Common Foot Fractures.
  path: 2024/2024-02-common-foot-fractures.md
  similarity: 0.6
  link: '[[2024/2024-02-common-foot-fractures|Common Foot Fractures.]]'
- title: Screening for Eating Disorders in Adolescents and Adults.
  path: 2023/2023-10-screening-for-eating-disorders-in-adolescents-and-adults.md
  similarity: 0.556
  link: '[[2023/2023-10-screening-for-eating-disorders-in-adolescents-and-adults|Screening
    for Eating Disorders in Adolescents and Adults.]]'
topics:
- Knee Pain
- Orthopedics
- Pharmacology
---

# Question ITE-2023-187

A 56-year-old male presents to your clinic for evaluation of knee pain. He reports several weeks of right knee pain with an occasional locking sensation. He has tried rest, acetaminophen, and ibuprofen with minimal relief. He usually walks for 1 hour daily but is currently unable to do this due to pain. His vital signs are normal except for a BMI of 33 kg/m2. On examination the left knee is unremarkable. The right knee is notable for pain localized to the right anterolateral region. There is no tenderness to palpation. You gently rotate the patient’s torso while he stands on the affected leg with the knee at 20° of flexion, resulting in pain in the right knee. The remainder of the examination is unremarkable. Which one of the following is the most likely diagnosis?

## Options

**A.** An anterior cruciate ligament tear

**B.** Gout

**C.** Iliotibial band syndrome

**D.** A lateral collateral ligament sprain

**E.** A meniscal tear

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

This patient likely has a meniscal tear as demonstrated by a positive Thessaly maneuver. Meniscal tears can be acute after a traumatic twisting injury or chronic and degenerative in nature. They are often comorbid with osteoarthritis, as is likely in this case. A joint effusion may be present with a meniscal tear but is not always seen. Typically, a tear to the anterior cruciate ligament will present acutely after an injury, with edema and moderate to severe pain. Provocative testing may be limited due to pain, but a positive Lachman test is the most sensitive maneuver. Gout typically presents with an acutely red, warm, swollen joint that may be confused with septic arthritis. Iliotibial band syndrome presents as leg or knee pain, often with tenderness just proximal to the lateral femoral epicondyle and would be unlikely to result in a positive Thessaly maneuver. A sprain of the lateral collateral ligament may have tenderness to palpation and should have laxity of the ligament noted on provocative testing.

## References

Bunt CW, Jonas CE, Chang JG. Knee pain in adults and adolescents: the initial evaluation. Am Fam Physician . 2018;98(9):576-585. 72
