---
id: ITE-2022-073
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 73
created: 2025-08-09 16:23:37.664706
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2022
answer: D
difficulty: Basic
topics:
- Endocrinology
- Preventive Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: afp clinical answers
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers.md
  similarity: 0.304
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-afp-clinical-answers|afp clinical answers]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:25:15.331441'
---

# Question ITE-2022-073

Which one of the following interventions has been shown to increase retinal screening rates in patients with diabetes mellitus?

## Options

**A.** One minute of counseling about the importance of retinal screening at each primary care visit

**B.** Digital reminders sent monthly to patients’ cell phones until they complete their retinal screenings

**C.** Conducting an office-wide prize drawing for patients who complete retinal screenings

**D.** Asynchronous teleretinal screening performed at the primary care provider’s office

**E.** Sharing office/clinic space with an ophthalmologist

## Answer

**D**

## Explanation

Telemedicine can be helpful in the management of many chronic conditions, including diabetes mellitus. Medicare and most private insurers pay for telemedicine visits at the same rate as in-person visits. Teleretinal screening performed at the primary care provider’s office should be considered in patients with diabetes as a cost-effective option for improving retinopathy screening rates (SOR B). Eyecare specialists can remotely evaluate the retinal photos for timely completion of annual retinopathy screening. Counseling about the importance of retinal screening, digital reminders, office-wide prize drawings, and sharing office space with an ophthalmologist have not been proven to be effective in increasing retinal screening rates in patients with diabetes.

## References

- Mullur RS, Hsiao JS, Mueller K: Telemedicine in diabetes care. Am Fam Physician 2022;105(3):281-288.
