---
id: ITE-2024-171
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 171
created: 2025-08-10 13:35:42.183921
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: D
topic: Family Medicine
related_articles: null
topics:
- Family Medicine
related_articles_2023_2025:
- title: graham center family medicine residency applications
  path: 2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications.md
  similarity: 0.313
  link: '[[2023/08/2023-08-graham-center-family-medicine-residency-applications|graham
    center family medicine residency applications]]'
- title: graham center family medicine research
  path: 2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research.md
  similarity: 0.308
  link: '[[2023/12/2023-12-graham-center-family-medicine-research|graham center family
    medicine research]]'
- title: editorial ai family medicine puulications
  path: 2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications.md
  similarity: 0.307
  link: '[[2025/01/2025-01-editorial-ai-family-medicine-publications|editorial ai
    family medicine puulications]]'
last_updated: '2025-08-10T20:27:12.966761'
---

# Question ITE-2024-171

## Question
A generally healthy 13 -month -old female is brought to the urgent care clinic by her parent because of 
concerns that she might have pneumonia. The parent says that the toddler has been coughing for the 
last week and has low energy and decreased appetite. Sh e does not have a history of wheezing or 
breathing problems.  
 Which one of the following history or physical examination findings, if present, would be the most 
concerning for community- acquired pneumonia as a cause of this toddler’s cough?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A 3-day history of fevers up to 100.2 °F
**B)** Cloudy nasal drainage
**C)** Coughing that wakes the child
**D)** Grunting and retractions
**E)** Recent pneumococcal vaccination

## Correct Answer
**D**

## Explanation
An abnormal chest examination, including grunting and retractions, is one of the physical examination findings most predictive of community -acquired pneumonia in pediatric patients and one of the criteria used in the Pediatric Acute Febrile Respiratory Illness rule. Nasal drainage and the absence of significant fever are negative predictors in this rule. Cough that disrupts sleep is a common reason for children to be seen by a physician for medical care, but it is not necessarily suggestive of pneumonia. Pneumococcal vaccination decreases a child’s risk for significant bacterial community - acquired pneumonia. Referenc es Chan FYY, Lui CT, Tse CF, Poon KM. Decision rule to predict pneumonia in children presented with acute febrile respiratory illness. Am J Emerg Med . 2020;38(12):2557 - 2563. Katz SE, Williams DJ. Pediatric community -acquired pneumonia in the United States: changing epidemiology, diagnostic and therapeutic challenges, and areas for future research. Infect Dis Clin North Am. 2018;32(1):47 -63. Kobayashi M, Farrar JL, Gierke R, et al. Use of 15 -valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine among US children: updated recommendations of the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices –United States, 2022. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep . 2022;71(37):1174 -1181. Murgia V, Manti S, Licari A, De Filippo M, Ciprandi G, Marseglia GL. Upper respiratory tract infection -associated acute cough and the urge to cough: new insights for clinical practice. Pediatr Allergy Immunol Pulmonol . 2020;33(1):3 -11. Smith DK, Kuckel DP, Recidoro AM. Community -acquired pneumonia in children: rapid evidence review. Am Fam Physician . 2021;104(6):618 -625.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*