---
id: ITE-2023-077
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 77
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.934179
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: A
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: 'Obstructive Sleep Apnea in Adults: Common Questions and Answers.'
  path: 2024/2024-07-obstructive-sleep-apnea-in-adults-common-questions-and-answe.md
  similarity: 0.619
  link: '[[2024/2024-07-obstructive-sleep-apnea-in-adults-common-questions-and-answe|Obstructive
    Sleep Apnea in Adults: Common Questions and Answers.]]'
- title: 'Hypertension in Adults: Initial Evaluation and Management.'
  path: 2023/2023-10-hypertension-in-adults-initial-evaluation-and-management.md
  similarity: 0.579
  link: '[[2023/2023-10-hypertension-in-adults-initial-evaluation-and-management|Hypertension
    in Adults: Initial Evaluation and Management.]]'
- title: Primary Aldosteronism.
  path: 2023/2023-09-primary-aldosteronism.md
  similarity: 0.429
  link: '[[2023/2023-09-primary-aldosteronism|Primary Aldosteronism.]]'
- title: Testosterone Replacement Therapy for Male Hypogonadism.
  path: 2024/2024-06-testosterone-replacement-therapy-for-male-hypogonadism.md
  similarity: 0.421
  link: '[[2024/2024-06-testosterone-replacement-therapy-for-male-hypogonadism|Testosterone
    Replacement Therapy for Male Hypogonadism.]]'
- title: 'Ischemic Stroke Management: Posthospitalization and Transition of Care.'
  path: 2023/2023-07-ischemic-stroke-management-posthospitalization-and-transitio.md
  similarity: 0.4
  link: '[[2023/2023-07-ischemic-stroke-management-posthospitalization-and-transitio|Ischemic
    Stroke Management: Posthospitalization and Transition of Care.]]'
topics:
- Blood Pressure
- Cardiology
- Coronary Artery Disease
- Geriatrics
- Heart Failure
- Neurology
---

# Question ITE-2023-077

A 90-year-old female sees you regularly for follow-up of several chronic medical conditions including systolic hypertension, coronary artery disease, previous ischemic stroke, and heart failure with preserved ejection fraction. Her systolic blood pressure is usually >160 mm Hg while her diastolic blood pressure is usually <50 mm Hg, making management challenging. In managing this patient’s blood pressure, an important physiologic consideration is that coronary artery perfusion is determined by which one of the following?

## Options

**A.** Diastolic blood pressure

**B.** Systolic blood pressure

**C.** Mean arterial pressure

**D.** Pulse pressure

**E.** Ejection fraction

## Answer

**A**

## Explanation

Perfusion of the myocardium occurs during diastole; therefore, the diastolic blood pressure (DBP) determines the coronary artery perfusion pressure. The systolic blood pressure (SBP), mean arterial pressure, pulse pressure (PP), and cardiac ejection fraction do not determine the coronary artery perfusion pressure. 31  PP is the SBP minus the DBP. The wide PP observed in older patients results from arterial stiffness. This causes an increase in the SBP and PP and a decrease in the DBP. This stiffness results from both arterial structural and functional changes with aging, including wall hypertrophy, calcifications, atheromatous lesions, changes in the extracellular matrix, and impairment of vascular endothelial function and smooth muscle cell reactivity. A wide PP makes it challenging to manage blood pressure with the goal of lowering SBP while ensuring a DBP that maintains coronary artery blood flow and avoids cardiac ischemia. Guidelines from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and the American Society of Hypertension recommend that blood pressure should be lowered slowly in patients with an elevated DBP and coronary artery disease with evidence of myocardial ischemia. The guidelines further recommend caution in lowering DBP to <60 mm Hg in patients older than 60 or who have diabetes mellitus.

## References

Rosendorff C, Lackland DT, Allison M, et al. Treatment of hypertension in patients with coronary artery disease: a scientific statement from the American Heart Association, American College of Cardiology, and American Society of Hypertension. Circulation . 2015;131(19):e435-e470. 2) Benetos A, Petrovic M, Strandberg T. Hypertension management in older and frail older patients. Circ Res. 2019;124(7):1045-1060.
