---
id: ITE-2022-158
type: ITE
year: 2022
number: 158
created: 2025-08-09T16:23:37.667292
tags: ["ITE", "question", "ITE-2022"]
answer: B
difficulty: Basic
topics: ["Endocrinology", "Dermatology", "Urology", "Hematology/Oncology"]
---

# Question ITE-2022-158

You are evaluating a couple for infertility. The semen analysis demonstrates oligozoospermia on two separate samples. The history and physical examination of the male partner are otherwise unremarkable. Which one of the following would be the most appropriate next step in the evaluation of his oligozoospermia?

## Options

**A.** A CBC with differential and a basic metabolic panel

**B.** FSH and early morning total testosterone levels

**C.** Antisperm antibody testing

**D.** Scrotal ultrasonography

**E.** Referral for a testicular biopsy

## Answer

**B**

## Explanation

A semen analysis is the first step in the evaluation of male infertility. In males with oligozoospermia (especially if the sperm count is <10 million/mL), the American Urological Association recommends an endocrine evaluation with an FSH level and early morning total testosterone levels. The results of that testing can dictate next steps. A CBC and a basic metabolic panel have no role in the evaluation of male infertility. Antisperm antibody testing is rarely recommended and should only be considered in consultation with a fertility specialist. Scrotal ultrasonography is not recommended in individuals with a normal physical examination and should only be performed in individuals with palpable varicoceles on physical examination. A testicular biopsy is not usually required to help differentiate between obstructive and nonobstructive azoospermia.

## References

- Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: AUA/ASRM guideline. American Urological Association and American Society for Reproductive Medicine, 2020. 2) Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: AUA/ASRM Guideline PART II. J Urol 2021;205(1):44-51.
