---
id: ITE-2024-141
type: ITE
year: 2024
number: 141
created: 2025-08-10T13:35:41.881968
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2024
- 2024-exam
answer: B
topic: Pediatrics
related_articles:
topics:
- Pediatrics
---

# Question ITE-2024-141

## Question
A healthy 15 -year-old female is brought to your office for a well adolescent visit. She does not have 
any health concerns or preexisting medical conditions.  
 
Based on the guidelines from the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, which one of the following 
would be most appropriate for this patient?

## Answer Choices
**A)** A vision examination
**B)** Depression screening
**C)** A CBC
**D)** A lipid panel
**E)** HPV testing

## Correct Answer
**B**

## Explanation
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) recommends depression screening for adolescents beginning at age 12 (B recommendation). The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) recommends routine vision screening from 12 months to 5 years of age and only risk-based vision screening in adolescents as vision conditions are less likely to begin in older children. The USPSTF recommends vision screening at least once in all children ages 3 –5 (B recommendation). Iron deficiency screening is not recommended in adolescents; however, the AAP recommends universal hemoglobin or hematocrit screening at 12 months of age while the USPSTF states that there is insufficient evidence (I recommendation). While the AAP recommends dyslipidemia screening in children ages 9 –11, the USPSTF currently states there is insufficient evidence for screening for ≤20 years of age (I recommendation). The USPSTF recommends against cervical cancer screening before age 21 (D recommendation). Furthermore, cytology is recommended for those age 21 and older while high -risk HPV testing is not recommended until age 30.

## References
s Lambert M. AAP updates recommendations for routine preventive pediatric health care. Am Fam Physician . 2016;94(4):324. US Preventive Services Task Force. A & B recommendations. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: iron deficiency anemia in young children: screening. Updated September 7, 2015. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: lipid disorders in children and adolescents: screening. Updated July 18, 2023. US Preventive Services Task Force. Final recommendation statement: vision in children ages 6 months to 5 years: screening. Updated September 5, 2017.

---
*Source: 2024 ABFM In-Training Examination*