---
id: ITE-2023-043
type: ITE
year: 2023
number: 43
created: 2025-08-08 10:07:36.931345
tags:
- ITE
- question
- ITE-2023
answer: E
topic: null
related_articles:
- title: Management of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus With Noninsulin Pharmacotherapy.
  path: 2024/2024-04-management-of-type-2-diabetes-mellitus-with-noninsulin-pharm.md
  similarity: 0.48
  link: '[[2024/2024-04-management-of-type-2-diabetes-mellitus-with-noninsulin-pharm|Management
    of Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus With Noninsulin Pharmacotherapy.]]'
- title: 'Galactorrhea: Rapid Evidence Review.'
  path: 2022/2022-12-galactorrhea-rapid-evidence-review.md
  similarity: 0.476
  link: '[[2022/2022-12-galactorrhea-rapid-evidence-review|Galactorrhea: Rapid Evidence
    Review.]]'
- title: 'Chronic Kidney Disease: Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment.'
  path: 2023/2023-12-chronic-kidney-disease-prevention-diagnosis-and-treatment.md
  similarity: 0.45
  link: '[[2023/2023-12-chronic-kidney-disease-prevention-diagnosis-and-treatment|Chronic
    Kidney Disease: Prevention, Diagnosis, and Treatment.]]'
- title: 'Management of Obesity: Office-Based Strategies.'
  path: 2024/2024-08-management-of-obesity-office-based-strategies.md
  similarity: 0.444
  link: '[[2024/2024-08-management-of-obesity-office-based-strategies|Management of
    Obesity: Office-Based Strategies.]]'
- title: 'Potassium Disorders: Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia.'
  path: 2023/2023-01-potassium-disorders-hypokalemia-and-hyperkalemia.md
  similarity: 0.4
  link: '[[2023/2023-01-potassium-disorders-hypokalemia-and-hyperkalemia|Potassium
    Disorders: Hypokalemia and Hyperkalemia.]]'
topics:
- Abdominal Pain
- Emergency Medicine
- Endocrinology
- Gastroenterology
- Nephrology
- Obstetrics/Gynecology
- Thyroid Hormone
- Urology
---

# Question ITE-2023-043

A 45-year-old female sees you for follow-up 3 days after a visit to the emergency department (ED) for acute abdominal pain due to an initial episode of a kidney stone. Her past medical history and family history are unremarkable. A CT scan in the ED demonstrated a nonobstructing, 4-mm mid-ureteral stone and several smaller stones in both kidneys, measuring up to 2 mm. Laboratory studies in the ED showed a calcium level of 11.4 mg/dL (N 8.0–10.0) and microscopic hematuria on urinalysis but were otherwise normal. She was treated with intravenous hydration and pain control and was discharged home. She passed the stone the next day. A physical examination today is normal. Follow-up laboratory studies confirm an elevated serum calcium level, along with elevated serum parathyroid hormone and 24-hour urine calcium levels. A DEXA scan and repeat microscopic urinalysis are normal. At this point, you should

## Options

**A.** prescribe a bisphosphonate

**B.** prescribe a thiazide diuretic

**C.** refer her for genetic evaluation

**D.** refer her for cystoscopy

**E.** refer her for parathyroidectomy

## Answer

**E**

## Explanation

This patient has laboratory evidence of primary hyperparathyroidism, with hypercalcemia and an inappropriately elevated (as opposed to suppressed) parathyroid hormone (PTH) level. An elevated 24-hour urine calcium level further distinguishes primary hyperparathyroidism from familial hypocalciuric hypercalcemia. Treatment of primary hyperparathyroidism with parathyroidectomy has been shown to normalize PTH and calcium levels, decrease kidney stone production, and prevent declines in renal function and bone mineral density. Untreated primary hyperparathyroidism increases overall mortality as well as cardiovascular and cerebrovascular disease risk, in addition to increasing the risk of kidney stone production, renal function decline, and loss of bone mineral density. Parathyroidectomy is indicated in this patient based on her symptomatic hypercalcemia, age <50, and serum calcium level >1 mg/dL above the upper limit of normal. Other potential indications include the presence of osteoporosis, reduced kidney function, or other asymptomatic renal involvement, including silent nephrolithiasis on imaging, nephrocalcinosis, or hypercalciuria. Patients with primary hyperparathyroidism who are not candidates for surgery may be managed medically. Bisphosphonates may be used to increase bone mineral density. For this patient with a normal DEXA scan, surgical treatment would obviate the possible future need to treat her for bone density loss related to hyperparathyroidism. Thiazides may be used for treating certain hyperparathyroid states due to their impact on reducing calcium excretion and improving bone mineral density, although they are typically avoided in primary hyperparathyroidism because they can worsen hypercalcemia. Genetic evaluation would be warranted for a patient suspected of having multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 or 2A, although this patient does not have any family history or presenting features to suggest involvement of either of these rare familial syndromes. Cystoscopy may be indicated in the setting of ureteral obstruction but is not necessary in this case.

## References

Insogna KL. Primary hyperparathyroidism. N Engl J Med . 2018;379(11):1050-1059. 2) Sell J, Ramirez S, Partin M. Parathyroid disorders. Am Fam Physician . 2022;105(3):289-298.
